1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF

THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal by way of a

Case Stated on a question of law for the

opinion of the Court of Appeal under

and in terms of Section 11A of the Tax

Appeals Commission Act No.23 of 2011

as amended by Act No.20 of 2013.

CARGILLS QUALITY DAIRIES

(Pvt) Ltd.,

No.40,

York Street,

Colombo 01.

APPELLANT

Case No. C.A. (Tax)29/2014

Tax Appeals Commission No. Vs

TAC/IT/040/2013

THE COMMISSIONER GENERAL OF

INLAND REVENUE.

14

th Floor,

Secretarial Branch,

Department of Inland Revenue,

Sir Chittampalam A .Gardiner

Mawatha,

Colombo 02.

RESPONDENT

2

Before : D.N.Samarakoon, J.

B. Sasi Mahendran, J. Counsel : Romesh De Silva PC with N.R. Sivendran, AAL for the Appellant.

N.Wigneshwaran, DSG for the Respondent Written Submissions : Appellant on 21.01.2019 Tendered on Respondent on 03.09.2020

Argued On : 16.11.2021

Decided On: 08.02.2022

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

In terms of Section 11A (2) of the Tax Appeals Commission Act No. 23 of

2011 as amended (hereinafter referred to as TAC Act) the Case stated was

transmitted to this Court by the Secretary to the Tax Appeals Commission by

letter dated 12.10.2015.

It contained the following twenty-six questions of law:

1. Is the decision of the Secretary to the Tax Appeals Commission

(hereinafter also referred as the Secretary), not fixing the appeal for

hearing, erroneous, invalid and bad in law, particularly because, the only

statutory function specified for the Secretary under Section 9(1) of the

TAC Act, is to fix the appeal for hearing on receipt of such appeal by the

Secretary?

3

2. Has the Secretary misunderstood, misconstrued and erred in law, by

refusing to list the appeal for hearing, particularly as there is no provision

in the TAC Act for the Secretary to refuse and not to accept an appeal

made to the Commission?

3. Is the decision of the Secretary of not listing the appeal, erroneous, invalid

and bad in law as the Secretary, when refusing to list the appeal for

hearing has not stated the provision (Section) of the Statute under which

the said refusal to list the appeal was exercised and thus, violated the

established legal principle that the exercise of power should be referable to

a valid jurisdiction?

4. Has the Secretary violated one of the principles of natural justice, the rule

of Audi alteram partem (The right to a fair hearing hear the other

side), by not providing a hearing to the Company before the Commission

before refusing to list the appeal?

5. Is the Secretary empowered by law to dispose an appeal without giving a

hearing for the Appellant?

6. Has the Secretary misunderstood, misconstrued and erred in law, by

refusing to list the appeal for hearing, particularly because CQD has

complied with proviso to Section 7(1) of the TAC Act, as it has paid

Rs.20,561,414/- (as confirmed by the Department of Inland Revenue by its

letter dated 23rdAugust 2013) which is in excess of 25% of the sum

assessed by the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue in the

determination(The sum assessed by the Commissioner General of Inland

Revenue in the determination is Rs. 53,601,301/-) and the said 20% is

equivalent to Rs. 13,400,325/- (25% of Rs. 53,601,301/-) and thus, the

refusal by the Secretary to the list the appeal for hearing by the

Commission is, erroneous, invalid and bad in law?

4

7. Has the Secretary acted unfairly, unjustly and unreasonably, by refusing

to list the appeal, after CQD gave a bank guarantee as suggested by the

Secretary, irrespective of the fact that CQD had already complied with

proviso to Section 7(1) of the TAC Act?

8. Has the Secretary misunderstood, misconstrued and erred in law, by

advising the Company to settle any dispute, relating to the compliance of

Section 7 of the TAC Act, with the Commissioner General of Inland

Revenue, when there, is no such provision in the TAC Act for such

reference to be made to the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue by

the Secretary?

9. Has the Secretary acted unfairly, unjustly and unreasonably, by

considering the letter dated 21

st May 2014 written by the Commissioner

General of Inland Revenue to the Commission, regarding the compliance

by CQD with proviso to Section 7(1) of the TAC Act, particularly as the

said letter dated 21

st May 2014 was obtained from the Commissioner

General of Inland Revenue on the advice given by the Secretary?

10. Is the decision of the Secretary, not listing the appeal for hearing

erroneous, invalid and bad in law, as the Secretary has not given any

reasons whatsoever as to the shortfall or inadequacy of the bank

guarantee which was given by CQD in compliance with proviso to Section

7(1) of the TAC Act?

11. Has the Secretary misunderstood, misconstrued and erred in law, by

seeking the direction of the TAC for not listing the appeal, when there is

no provision in the TAC Act for the Secretary to seek such a direction from

the Commission?

Page 5 of 17

12. Is the decision of the Commission, by not allowing the Secretary to fix

the appeal, erroneous, invalid and bad in law, particularly because, the

only statutory function specified for the Secretary under Section 9(1) of

the TAC Act, is to fix the appeal for hearing on receipt of such appeal

by the Secretary?

13. Has the Commission misunderstood, misconstrued and erred in law,

by refusing to list the appeal for hearing, particularly as there is no

provision in the TAC Act for the Commission to refuse and not to

accept made to the Commission?

14. Is the decision of the Commission of not listing the appeal, erroneous,

invalid and bad in law, as the Commission, when refusing to the list

the appeal for hearing has not stated the provision (Section) of the

Statute under which the said refusal to list the appeal was exercised

and thus, violated the established legal principle that the exercise of

power should be referable to a valid jurisdiction?

15. Has the Commission violated one of the principles of natural justice,

the rule Audi alteram partem The right to a fair hearing hear the

other side, by not providing a hearing to the Company before refusing

to list the appeal made by the Company?

16. Is the Commission empowered by law to dispose an appeal without

giving a hearing for the Appellant, particularly where in terms of

Section 2 of the TAC Act, the Commission is charged with the

responsibility of hearing all the appeals and in terms of Section 10 of

the TAC Act, the Commission shall hear all the appeals received by it?

Page 6 of 17

17. Has the Commission misunderstood, misconstrued and erred in law,

by refusing to list the appeal for hearing, particularly because CQD

has complied with proviso to Section 7(1) of the TAC Act, as it has paid

Rs.20,561,414/- (as confirmed by the Department of Inland Revenue by

its letter dated 23rdAugust 2013) which is in excess of 25% of the sum

assessed by the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue in the

determination (The sum assessed by the Commissioner General of

Inland Revenue in the determination is Rs. 53,601,301/-) and the said

25% is equivalent to Rs. 13,400,325/- (25% of Rs. 53,601,301/-) and

thus, the refusal by the Commission to the list the appeal for hearing

by the Commission is, erroneous, invalid and bad in law?

18. Has the Commission acted unfairly, unjustly and unreasonably, by

refusing to list the appeal, after CQD gave a bank guarantee as

suggested by the Secretary, irrespective of the fact that CQD had

already complied with proviso to Section 7(1) of the TAC Act?

19. Has the Commission acted unfairly, unjustly and unreasonably, by not

considering the letter dated 21

st May 2014 written by Commissioner

General of Inland Revenue to the Commission, regarding the

compliance by CQD with proviso to Section 7(1) of the TAC Act?

20. Is the decision of the Commission, of not listing the appeal for hearing

erroneous, invalid and bad in law, as the Commission has not given

any reasons whatsoever as to the shortfall or inadequacy of the bank

guarantee which was given by CQD incompliance with proviso to

Section 7(1) of the TAC Act?

21. Has the Commission misunderstood, misconstrued and erred in law,

by directing the Secretary not to list the appeal, when there is no

provision in the TAC Act to provide such a direction to the Secretary?

Page 7 of 17

22. Has the Commission misunderstood, misconstrued and erred in law,

by seeking the views of the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue

in listing the appeal, when there is no provision in the TAC Act to seek

the views of the Commissioner General of the Inland Revenue to list

the appeal?

23. Has the Commission contravened the provisions of the TAC Act and

also, violated one of the principles of natural justice ( the rule of Audi

Alteram Partem The right to a fair hearing hear the other side) by

seeking only the views of the Commissioner General of the Inland

Revenue and not the views of the Company, in deciding not to allow

the listing of appeal for hearing?

24. Has CQD complied with proviso to Section 7(1) of the TAC Act, as it

has paid Rs. 20,561,414/- (as confirmed by the Department of Inland

Revenue by its letter dated 23rd August 2013) which is in excess of

25% of the sum assessed by the Commissioner General of Inland

Revenue in the determination (sum assessed by the Commissioner

General of Inland Revenue in the determination is Rs. 53,601,301/-)

which is equivalent to Rs. 13,400,325/- (25% of Rs. 53,601,301/-)?

25. Has the Commission and/ or the Secretary wrongfully, unlawfully,

unfairly and unjustly denied the right of appeal of the Company by not

listing the appeal for hearing?

26. Once the Appeal is lodged to the Commission, should not the validity

or the legality or the maintainability of the said appeal be determined,

only by the Commission at a hearing before the Commission?

Page 8 of 17

The main grievance of the Appellant is that the Petition of Appeal which

was filed to the Tax Appeals Commission was rejected by the Secretary to the

Commission (not by the Commission) without giving a hearing to the Appellant.

The said rejection was informed by the Secretary to the Commission by

letter dated 02.09.2013.

The contents of the letter read as follows;

Since you have not complied with the requirement of Section 7 of the Tax

Appeals Commission Act No.23 of 2011 as amended, namely, the provision of a

bank guarantee or cash deposit of the sum as assessed by the Commissioner

General of Inland Revenue, we are not in a position to accept your papers

relating to the appeal.

If you have a dispute relating to the complying of Section 7 of the Tax

Appeals Commission Act, you have to settle it with the Commissioner General of

Inland Revenue.

The Respondent has in its written and oral submissions taken a

preliminary objection as to the jurisdiction of this Court. It was submitted that

where an appeal has not been entertained by the Commission, the Case Stated

procedure cannot be availed of. The correct procedure in its opinion is to

challenge by way of judicial review in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution.

I am unable to agree with the objection raised by the Respondent for the

simple reason that according to the Section 11A (6) of the TAC Act this Court is

cloaked with the jurisdiction when it is obliged to give an opinion on any

question of law arising on the Case Stated remitted by the Commission.

Page 9 of 17

This Court has to consider who has to take decisions with regard to the

accepting or rejecting of the appeal as per the provision in Section 11A (2) of the

TAC Act.

For the purpose of convenience Section 11A (2) of the TAC Act is

reproduced below;

The case stated by the Commission shall set out the facts, the decision of

the Commission, and the amount of the tax in dispute where such amount

exceeds five thousand rupees, and the party requiring the Commission to state

such case shall transmit such case, when stated and signed to the Court of

Appeal, within fourteen days after receiving the same. [emphasis added]

I am unable to find any provision in the TAC Act which contemplates or

makes provisions for the Secretary to take decisions with regard to an appeal.

On the other hand, there is a provision in the said Act concerning the hearing

and determination of an appeal tendered by an aggrieved party. That is Section

8(3) of the said Act. It is pertinent to observe that Section which reads as follows:

The manner and the form of submitting such appeal, the procedure to be

followed by the Commission in the hearing and determining of such appeal and

the fees if any in respect thereof shall be determined by the Commission by rules

made, from time to time, in that behalf.

On the other hand, the only provision of the said Act which provides for

the functions of the Secretary is Section 9 (1) of the said Act. According to that

Section, the Secretary shall .within thirty days of the receipt of an

appeal.. fix a date and time and place for the hearing of the appeal.

Hence there is no authority conferred on the Secretary by this Act to take

decisions with regard to the acceptance or rejection of appeals.

Page 10 of 17

At this juncture, this Courts attention is drawn to the statutory provision

which provides the criteria for the appointment of the members of the Tax

Appeals Commission.

Section 2 of the TAC Act states as follows:

(1)

(2) The Commission shall comprise not more than nine members three of

whom shall be appointed from amongst retired Judges of the Supreme

Court or the Court of Appeal and six other members from amongst persons

who have wide knowledge of, and have gained eminence in the fields of

Taxation, Finance and Law, by the Minister to whom the subject of

Finance is assigned. One of the members shall be appointed as the

Chairman of the Commission by the Minister.

(2A)The Chairman of the Commission shall constitute three panels comprising

three members each, from among the members appointed under subsection

one of whom shall be a Judge as specified in subsection (2) to hear and

determine any matter before the Commission.

(3)

(4)

It is evident that Parliament has in its wisdom intended the members of

the Commission to not only have acquired wide knowledge in the relevant

fields but also to be of such calibre to have gained eminence in the said fields.

I wish to reproduce the observation made by the Hon. Mr Justice

Popplewell in P v. Q [2017 EWCH 194 (Comm) at para 68]

..The danger may be greater with arbitrators who have no judicial

training or background, than with judges who are used to reaching entirely

independent adjudicatory decisions with the benefit of law clerks or other junior

judicial assistants. However, the danger exists for all tribunals. Best practice is

therefore to avoid involving a tribunal secretary in anything which could be

Page 11 of 17

characterised as expressing a view on the substance of that which the tribunal is

called upon to decide.

It is noteworthy to consider the judgment of His Lordship Justice

Malalgoda in Anoma S.Polwatte v.Jayawickrama& Others [SC/Writ Application

No. 1/2011 (Decided on 26.07.2018)] where his Lordship has considered the

powers and functions of the Commission to Investigate Bribery and Corruption.

According to Section 3 of Bribery Act, it is the Commission that directs the

institution of proceedings. The question considered in this case was whether such

a direction given by one of the members of the Commission is lawful.

His Lordship held;

Thus it is clear that the members of the Commission can exercise

ancillary powers on his own though the full complement of the Commission is not

available at one given time. But as for the exercise of functions such as the

direction to be given to the Director General, it is crystal clear that the Act has

not provided for one member alone to give such direction.

Similar provision with regard to filing of an appeal is found in Section

755(5) of the Civil Procedure Code. In the said Section the proviso reads as

follows.

Provided that when the Judge of the original court has expressed an

opinion that there is no right of appeal against the judgment or decree appealed

against, the Registrar shall submit the petition of appeal to the President of the

Court of Appeal or any other Judge nominated by the President of the Court of

Appeal who shall require the petition to be supported in open court by the

petitioner or an attorney on his behalf on a day to be fixed by such Judge, and

the court having heard the petitioner or his attorney, may, reject such petition or

fix a date for the hearing of the petition, and order notice thereafter to be issued

on the respondents;

Page 12 of 17

In Dharmaratne v. Kumari[2005] 1 SLR 265 His Lordship Justice

Wimalachandra held that the District Judge has no power to reject a notice of

appeal even though he may call upon the Appellant to rectify any defect in the

notice of appeal. The District Judges function is merely to forward the notice of

appeal and the petition of appeal to the Court of Appeal.

This Court is of the opinion that the proviso to Section 7 (1) TAC Act,

which requiring to furnish security, confers a discretion only on the Tax Appeals

Commission.

Now this Court will consider the purpose of furnishing security under

Section 7 (1) of the TAC Act.

Proviso to Section 7 (1) is reproduced as follows;

Provided that, every person who wishes to appeal to the Commission

under paragraph (a) shall, at the time of making of such appeal, be required to

pay into a special account which shall be opened and operated by the

Commission for such purpose, an amount-

a) as is equivalent to ten per centum which is non- refundable; or

b) as is equivalent to twenty five per centum which is refundable subject

to subsection (1A) of this Section or a bank guarantee for the

equivalent amount which shall remain valid until the appeal is

determined by the Commission.

There is no dispute when the Appellant lodged the appeal to the Tax

Appeals Commission, the Appellant has informed that there was no need to

make a fresh deposit as there was a tax credit which is more than 25 percent of

the determination of the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue as required

by the said section.

Page 13 of 17

The object of requiring security is to avoid frivolous and vexatious appeals

as well as to ensure that once an appeal is concluded those moneys are readily

available to the Department of Inland Revenue. It should be noted that the said

Section was introduced by Act No. 20 of 2013 to ensure the money can be

recovered.

His Lordship Justice Mark Fernando in Sri Lanka General Workers Union

v. Samaranayake [1996] 2 SLR 268 at 272 expressed a similar view. Referring to

Section 31 D (6) of Industrial Disputes Act, as amended, His Lordship held,

There can be doubt that the legislative intention was to ensure that at

the conclusion of the appellate proceedings, however lengthy, there would be a

fund available to satisfy the workmans entitlements; and, by providing for

interest, to ensure that the lapse of time and inflation would not unduly erode

those entitlements

In Nanayakkara v. Warnakulasuriya. 1993 (2)SLR289 at 294 His

Lordship Justice Kulatunga made the following observation.

I wish to make an observation. Even though the District Court

appears to have no power to reject a notice of appeal for failure to

hypothecate security, it may perhaps call upon the appellant to rectify the

defect where the non-compliance is observed at the stage when notice of

appeal is given.

Therefore, the purpose of furnishing the said security is to ensure that the

money is readily available to be recovered at the conclusion of the appeal.

Be that as it may, if Court presumes that the Commission directed the

Secretary to inform the Appellant of the rejection of its appeal on the basis of

non-compliance with Section 7 of the TAC Act the question arises whether the

non -compliance of that Section is mandatory or directory? It should be noted

Page 14 of 17

that the TAC Act does not specify any penal consequences for non-compliance of

the provisions of Section 7.

Whether a provision is mandatory or directory was discussed in the

following cases.

Justice G.P.A.Silva,J (as he then was) held in Rajen Philip v.

Commissioner of Inland Revenue (CA No. 1174/81 Sri Lanka Tax Cases Vol.IV P.

211)

What, then, is the test to determine whether a statutory provision is

mandatory, and what is the test to determine whether disregard of such a

provision has the effect of nullifying a decision taken in disregard of such

statutory provisions? Under the heading disregard of procedural and formal

requirements . S.A. de Smith suggests the following test:-

When Parliament prescribes the manner or form in which a duty is to be

performed, it seldom lays down what will be the legal consequences of failure to

observe its prescriptions: The Courts must therefore formulate their own criteria

for determining whether the procedural rules are to be regarded as mandatory,

in which case disobedience will render void or voidable what has been done, or as

.directory, in which case disobedience will be treated as an irregularity not

affecting the validity of what has been done. Judges have often stressed the

impracticability of specifying exact rules for the assignment of a procedural

provision to the appropriate category. The whole scope and purpose of the

enactment must be considered, and one must assess the importance of the

provision that has been disregarded, and the relation of that provision to the

general object intended to be secured by the Act'. Judicial Review of

Administrative Action (4th Ed) 142.

Page 15 of 17

A similar view was expressed by His Lordship Justice U. De Z.

Gunawardhana in Fernando v. Ceylon Brewerys Ltd [1998] (3) SLR 61 at 69. His

Lordship held that:

The question whether provision in a statute is mandatory or

directory is not capable of generalisation but when the legislature has not said

which is which, one of the basic tests for deciding whether a statutory

direction is mandatory or directory is to consider whether violation thereof

is penal or not. It has been the traditional view that where disobedience of

a provision is expressly made penal it has to be concluded that the

provision is mandatory whereas if no penalty is prescribed non-compliance

with the provisions of a statute may held to be directory.

Further His Lordship at p.70 held,

In a case referred to in Bindra on Interpretation page 669 it had

been stated that: "a statute which requires certain things to be done or

provides what result shall follow a failure to do them, is mandatory but if the

statute does not declare what result shall follow a failure to do the

required acts it is directory".

When we perused the Section in the light of the above judicial dictums

there is no provision providing for penal consequences for failure to comply with

the provision of the said Section. Therefore, we hold that the provision of this

Section is directory. In fact, it was submitted in open court by the Counsel for

the Appellant that the sum of money demanded by the Commission had been

furnished subsequently.

Further, I wish to mention that Our Courts have adopted liberal attitudes

with regard to the Tax laws.

Page 16 of 17

In Nanayakkara v. University of Peradeniya [1991] (1) SLR 97, S.N.

Silva,J, (as he then was)held that;

The Stamp Duty Act imposes a pecuniary burden on the people. Therefore

it is subject to the rule of strict construction. (Maxwell on interpretation of

statutes., 12th Edition page 256). In the case of Cape Brandy Syndicate vs. I.R.C,

Rowlatt J stated as follows:

In a taxing Act one has to look merely at what is clearly said. There is no

room for any intendment. There is no equity about a tax. There is no

presumption as to a tax. Nothing is to be read in, nothing is to be implied. One

can only look fairly at the language used.

In Vallibel Lanka (Pvt.) Limited v. Director General of Customs and three others, [2008] 1 SLR 219 Sripavan J. (as he then was) held;

It is the established rule in the interpretation of statutes that levy taxes

and duties, not to extend the provisions of the statute by implication, beyond the

clear import of the language used or to enlarge their operation in order to

embrace matters not specifically pointed out. In case of doubt, the provisions are

construed most strongly against the state and in favour of the citizen.

The court cannot give a wider interpretation to Section 16 [of the Customs

Ordinance]. merely because some financial loss may in certain

circumstances be caused to the state. Considerations of hardship, injustice or

anomalies do not play any useful role in construing fiscal statutes.

For the foregoing reasons, the opinion of this Court is that all questions of

law raised in this case should be answered in favour of the Appellant.

Page 17 of 17

Therefore, this Court directs the Registrar to send this case back to the

Tax Appeals Commission for them to hear and determine this appeal, according

to the provisions of law.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D.N.SAMARAKOON,J

I AGREE

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL