1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Dissanayake Lekamlage Nimal

Jayatiss of Puwakgaha Deniya

Algama.

~ Defendant-Appellant.

C.A.No.948/97 (F) Vs.

D.C.Kegalle No.21371/P. la.Dissanayaka Arachchilage Wickremanayake

Ihalagama Algama

Substituted 1st Plaintiff

Respondent-Respondent

2a. Apuralalage Piyasena

Pahalagama, Lawngama

Substituted 2 nd Defendant Appellant

1 a Rathnayaka Pathirennehelage Leelawathi

1 b. Lionel Donald Tilak

Kumara

lc. Ramani Lilanthi Kumara

2

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

1d. Ranjini Kumari all of Puwakgahadeniya, Algama

All of Puwakgahadeniya, Algama

And others

Substituted-Derendant-Respondents

M.M.A.Gaffoor,J

Chandana Wijesooriya for the

Substituted 7th Defendant-Appellant

Nimal Muthukumarana for the

Plaintiff-Respondent.

07.07.2017

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

FILED ON 7th Defendant-Appellant filed on

DECIDEDON

02/10/2018

Plaintiff-Respondent filed on

27.11.2018

27/02/2018

[!rt '"~,I

i

I . 1

3

M.M.A.GafToor,J.

This appeal emanates from the judgment of the learned

District Judge Kegalle 21371/P whereby the plaintiff has sought to

partition the co-owned property depicted in the schedule to the

plaint. "Thalanugahamula ovita".

The case proceeded with

1 - 5 issues raised by the plaintiff.

6 - 13 issues raised by the 5th defendant,

14 - 19 raised by the 7th defendant.

The main contention of the plaintiff was that according to

Issue 5 whether the plaintiff Dissanayake Arachchilage

Wickremanayake had acquired prescriptive title to the land in issue.

5th defendant in issue No.13 also had raised the issue of

prescription in respect of the land in dispute.

The 7th defendant too by Issue No.18 raises the Issue of

prescription.

The learned Trial Judge after trial had pronounced the

judgment on 24.07.1997 ( Appeal brief 203). The trial Judge had

4

accepted the corpus to be partitioned is depicted in plan No.2435

marled X pertaining to the land called" Thalanugahamula owita"

The learned District Jude had made the following observations

in his judgment page 208 appeal brief.

a. The 1 st defendant had submitted an incomplete

pedigree.

b. The 7th defendant too had accepted the pedigree

submitted by the 1 st defendant.

c. The 1 st and 7th defendant in their evidence as taken

up the position that their father Punchi Appuhamy

had acquired title though a plantation agreement but

had failed to adduce the said agreement in evidence.

d. The 5th defendant had adduced evidence that she has

acquired possession though her father. The 2nd

plaintiff too has adduced evidence that she had

possessed part of the land.

In the case of Kiriamma Vs. Podi Banda and other - 2005

BALJ 9, Udulagama J adverted to very important points that has to

be borne in mind in a claim of prescriptive title.

They can be summarized as follows;

I

5

1) The burden of provIng posseSSIon IS on the party

claiming prescription.

2) Prescription is a question of fact.

3) Title by prescription is an illegality made legal.

4) In Sri Lanka prescriptive title is required to be by

adverse to an independent of a claimant.

In the case of Thilakarathne Vs. Bastian - 21 NLR and

Perera Vs. Menchi Nona, the principle of prescription has been

further enunciated, the burden of proving prescriptive title is in fact

should be definite and heavy. This principle is in fact embodied in

the Evidence Ordinance which stipulates that "one who asserts

must prove". Therefore the substantive law, the Evidence Ordinance

too stipulates this situation.

Section 101 of the Evidence Ordinance Illustrations (b) "A

desires a Court to give judgment that he is entitled to certain land

in the possession of B by reason of facts which he asserts, and

which B denies to be true".

The above principles have been enunciated in De Silva Vs.

Director General Inland Revenue 80 NLR 292. In the case of

i y

6

Weragoda Vs. Peiris 1996(2) SLR 56 it is observed "Right of

posseSSIon to cultivate acknowledges the right of some other

person."

In the case in point the 1 st and the 7th defendants have taken

up the position that their father Punch Appuhamy has acquired

title through a " Waga Bukthiya". Therefore until such time as they

shed their right of limited possession, adverse possession will not

commence.

In the case of Bandara Vs. Sinhhappu 47 NLR 249 log

continued and undisturbed and uninterrupted possession by a co-

owner could constitute a presumption of ouster against other co-

owners. Each co-owner can acquire title by prescription to the

specific portion in his land. In the case of Siyathu Hamy Vs. Podi

Menike 2004 (2) SLR 323 it was observed that possession of one

co-owner is presumed as possession for and on behalf of all other

co-owners. In order to prescribe against the co-owners the other

co-owner must prove the commencement of an act of ouster and

adverse possession.

The trial Judge has come to the conclusion the corpus to be

partitioned is co-owned property. And various parties have made

their claims as regards to buildings and other constructions and

7

plantations in the corpus before the surveyor who surveyed the

land on a commission.

On the basis of the above judgments the learned District Judge

had come to the correct conclusion and has answered the issues in

respect of the above case in his judgment at page 211.

We see no reason to interfere with the judgment.

Hence the considered judgment of the learned District Judge of

Kegalle cannot be disturbed.

Appeal is dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL