IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

C.A.No.189-190/2016

H.C. Matara No. HC 12V2012

In the matter of an Appeal under

Section 11(1) of the High Courts of

the Provinces (Special Provisions)

Act No. 19 of 1990 read with Article

138(1) of the Amendment Act No. 13

of the Constitution.

1. Nambukara Thanthrige Mahesh

Maduranga alias Suddha

2. Raigam Koralage Dinesh

Dheerasekera

Accused-Appellants

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Comp lainant-Respondent

***********

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

DEEP ALI WIJESUNDERA, J.

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

Indica Mallawarachchi with K. Kugaraja for the 1 st Accused -Appellant.

Dr. Ranjit Fernando for the 2nd Accused-Appellant

Sudharshana de Silva D.5.G. for the respondent

21st June, 2019

06th August, 2019

****************

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

This is an appeal by the 1st and 2nd accused-appellants (hereinafter

referred to as the "1st and 2nd appellants") challenging their conviction for

the offence of murder alleged to have been committed on Talpawila

Kankanamge Vipul Ram on 18.11.2008 at Hittatiya and also for causing

grievous hurt to Samaratunga Vidana Arachchige Priyanka Lakmali by the

Hi~h Court of Matara on 25.07.2016, after a trial without a jury.

It is the prosecution evidence that the two appellants have forcibly

entered the house of the deceased at about 10.30/11.30 p.m. and had

attacked the deceased who was sleeping with his wife Priyanka Lakmali and

their two children with cutting weapons. Lakmali too had suffered several

2

cut injuries when she tried to intervene to ward off the attack. It is also

evident that the deceased was brought home that evening by some of his

family members in a heavily intoxicated state and was laid on the bed.

Lakmali had clearly identified the two appellants and sought assistance of

her immediate neighbour to make a phone call to someone who could take

her husband to hospital.

The deceased was eventually admitted to Matara Hospital where he

succumbed to his injuries two days later.

The prosecution led the evidence of Srimali Priyanka who stated that

the two appellants have entered her house at about 10.30 p.m. on the same

night looking for her husband who had already left for fishing. The 1st

appellant had a long bladed knife with him and had threatened her that

she too would be cut.

Chief Inspector Abeysekera of Matara Police conducted investigations

into the incident and noted that the front door of the deceased's house,

built with wooden planks, was forced open and had a damaged latch. He

also noted large patches of blood on the bed and observed that the

mosquito net too had been cut in several places.

The deceased had suffered 18 cut and stab injuries in total and died

due to acute peritonitis which was caused by the penetrating injuries

through his intestines while his wife Lakmali had suffered total of seven

injuries which included several long cut injuries and a broken bone. She

had implicated "Dinesh and another" in the attack and stated that she

sustained injuries when she tried to save her husband.

3

When the trial Court ruled that the appellants had a case to answer,

they made short statements from the dock totally denying any

involvement with the incident. The appellants have called two witnesses,

Vinitha and the mother of the 1st appellant, Gunaseeli to give evidence on

their behalf.

Vinitha stated that the wife of the deceased sought her assistance to

call for help soon after the incident. Lakmali only stated that they were

attacked but when enquired as to who it was, she replied that she did not

identify them. Gunaseeli in her evidence stated that the deceased, his

brother Susantha and another have attacked the 1st appellant at their home.

They damaged the window panes and the cabinet. She had then set off to

police to lodge a complaint at about 10.00 p.m. and returned hom~ after

midnight.

In support of the appeal of the 1st appellant, learned Counsel

contended that the trial Court had erroneously rejected the defence

evidence which she submitted on a fatally flawed basis and causing

serious prejudice to the 1st appellant. She also relied on the ground that the

trial Court had failed to consider the lesser culpability on the basis of

sudden fight to which there were clear evidence.

Learned Counsel for the 2nd appellant submitted that the trial Court

had failed to consider the provocation offered by the deceased and his

associates since the evidence revealed that the attack on the deceased is

immediately after an act of assault and mischief on the appellants.

The several grounds of appeal, as urged by the appellants could be

considered together since the underlying issue is the consideration of

4

lesser culpability of the appellants. The evidence of Gunaseeli does not seek

to absolve any of the appellants from the allegation mounted by the

prosecution against them but only to highlight the attendant circumstances

that immediately preceded the attack.

In this appeal, the appellants have totally denied any involvement

with the death of the deceased in their statements from the dock. Hence, in

order to derive the benefit of lesser culpability upon any of the general

exceptions of Section 294 of the Penal Code, the appellants had to rely on

the available evidence. The only available evidence in relation to the claim

of sudden fight are the answers given by the lay witnesses of the

prosecution to the suggestions made by the appellants during cross-

examination and the evidence of Gunaseeli who claims to have witnessed

an attack on her son, the 1st appellant by the deceased and two of his

companions.

During the cross-examination of Lakmali and Srimali Priyanka the

appellants have suggested two propositions. Firstly they suggested that

the deceased and two others have attacked the 1st appellant in his own

home about half an hour before the attack on the deceased. Lakmali only

admitted that she had heard of such an incident but what she heard is that

only the younger brother of the deceased was attacked and not the 1st

appellant. The witness had consistently denied the suggestion that the

deceased and two others were waiting to pounce upon the 1st appellant

near the former's house. She also denied the suggestion which had been

repeatedly put to her in more than six times that the attack on the deceased

took place in his compound (Sl:;@) and not inside the house.

5

Secondly, witness Sri mali Priyanka was also suggested by the 1st

appellant that she, being a neighbour, should have heard the commotion at

his house over the attack by the deceased and her husband susantha. She

denied the suggestion on the footing that it was normal in that house to

have such commotions on a daily basis.

Thus, in view of the denials consistently maintained by these two

witnesses, the position advanced by the 1st appellant that the deceased and

two others have attacked him that night remains only as suggestions and

not as "evidence" in the case. In this context, the evidence of his witness

becomes more important for she is the only person who gave evidence of

such an attack. Since the appellants maintained a total denial in their

evidence. During cross-examination of CI Abeysekera, the 1st appellant had

elicited that the complaint lodged by his mother was investigated by him

when he visited his house that night. The officer had observed that the

glass sheet of the" cabinet" was broken. It is strange, as pointed out by the

learned DSG, that the 1st appellant further elicited that the investigations

conducted by the witness revealed that it was the 1st appellant himself who

damaged the "cabinet". This position was repeated by the witness when

the 1st appellant clarified the issue at a later point and thereby negating

any mistake of fact on the part of the police officer in giving that evidence.

This item of evidence, that had been presented before the trial Court

by an independent person, was not contradicted by the 1st appellant and

was left unchallenged. It is clear that the 1st appellant had heavily relied on

this alleged act of mischief by the deceased in support of his claim of

sudden fight. However, the 1st appellant had left this issue in conflict with

his mother's evidence. The prosecution highlighted an important omission 6

of Gunaseeli's evidence. She had not mentioned about this incident in her

statement to Police. It is reasonable to expect that she should have

mentioned it in her statement, if that was the case, since she too was placed

in remand in connection with this murder when she made the said

statement. Cumulative effect of these factors points clearly to the

reasonable inference that this is obviously an afterthought by the 1st

appellant who led his mother's evidence before the trial Court in support

of his case. Hence the rejection of the appellant's evidence by the trial

Court becomes justified conclusion contrary to the submissions of the

appellants.

The Court of Criminal Appeal, in the judgment of The King v Andris

Silva 41 N.L.R. 433, held that:

" ... jury should not pay the slightest attention to any

suggestions put to the witnesses in cross examination

unless those suggestions were supported by proof"

Thus, in the absence of any "evidence" before the trial Court that is

capable of supporting the claim of lesser culpability on the basis of a

sudden fight, the trial Court is entitled to hold that the offence of murder is

made out.

In delivering the judgment of The King v Johanis et al44 N.L.R. 145,

in the Court of Criminal Appeal, Hearne J cleared a misunderstanding that

was evident in the appeal before his Lordship on the principle enunciated

7

in the judgment of The King v Chandrasekere 44 N.L.R. 97 as his Lordship

states (at p.147);

"This case lays down that if the existence of

circumstances which would bring "the case within

one of the exceptions" is involved in doubt, the

existence of those circumstances cannot be said to have

been proved. It does not lay down that if two possible

views may be taken of a set of proved circumstances,

the Jury is precluded from adopting either or those two

views. In fact, as it appears to me, just as inevitably

as one cannot have one side of a sheet of paper without

the other, there cannot be one view of a matter and not

the contrary view as well. If, for instance, an accused

rests his defence upon exception 1 of section 294 of the

Penal Code, the Jury may decide that he has proved,

within the meaning of proof in section 3 of the

Evidence Ordinance, the circumstances alleged by him

and yet may hold or not hold that, he lost his self-

control in consequence of the provocation to which he

was subjected. Similarly, when circumstances are in

evidence which the Jury regard as having been proved,

they mayor may not hold that those circumstances

established that there was a sudden fight, upon a

sudden quarrel, and that the accused "did not take

undue advantage, & c." It is only if they are in doubt

as to whether they should or should not hold that

circumstances existed which brought the case within

8

exception 4 of section 294 of the Penal Code, that the

existence of such circumstances cannot be said to have

been proved. Even if two views are possible they may

have no doubt as to which of these views they prefer to

take on the basis of probability."

This pronouncement of the Court of Criminal Appeal concerns two

situations. Firstly, it deals with the situation where the "evidence"

presented by an accused to bring his case within one of the exceptions "is

involved in doubt", then" the existence of those circumstances cannot be said to

have been proved".

Secondly, it deals with a situation where the evidence of the accused

to bring his case within one of the exceptions is "proved" as per Section 3

of the Evidence Ordinance but fails to satisfy that those circumstances

could bring his case within any of the exceptions of Section 294 of the

Penal Code.

Essentially, their Lordships have approached the issue on two levels.

In order to successfully bring his case within one of the exceptions an

accused must establish the circumstances that he relied on have existed in

the first place. Thereafter, he must also establish whether those

circumstances that he relied on are sufficient to bring his case within the

exception that had been relied upon.

9

The evidence of the prosecution clearly points that the appellants

have attacked the deceased when he was sleeping with his family on the

bed. The observations made by the investigating officer offers ample

support for Lakmali's evidence to that effect. The trial Court is duty bound

to consider the available evidence even if the appellants maintained a total

denial as per the judgments of The King v Edin 41 N.L.R. 345 and

Chandradasa v The Queen 55 N.L.R. 439. Perusal of the judgment of the

trial Court indicates that it did.

In reference to the appeal before this Court, it is clearly seen that the

appellant's have failed to go beyond the first stage since the circumstances

they relied on in support of the claim of sudden fight have not been

established. The appellants have totally denied any involvement to the

death of the deceased. As a result, the appellants had to rely on the

evidence of the 1st appellant's mother and the suggestions made to the

prosecution witnesses. As noted earlier on, the suggestions of the

appellants were denied by the prosecution witnesses and therefore offers

no help to the appellants in this regard. The evidence of Gunaseeli, even if

one were to consider them in spite of its lack of credibility, also does not

support the appellant's claim of sudden fight.

When this Court considers the claim of the appellants, that the

injuries that resulted in the death of the deceased were caused to him

during a sudden fight, in the light of the reasoning contained in the 10

judgment of The King v Johanis et al (supra) it becomes clear that there

was no grave and sudden provocation, no self-defence and there was no

sudden fight during which the deceased had come by his death. The

appeal of the appellants is therefore without merit and ought to be

dismissed on that account.

The conviction and sentence entered by the High Court against the

appellants on both counts are therefore affirmed.

The appeal of the 1st and 2nd appellants is accordingly dismissed.

JUDGE OF TIlE COURT OF APPEAL

DEEP ALI WITESUNDERA, T.

I agree.

JUDGE OF TIlE COURT OF APPEAL

11