1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979.

Court of Appeal No:

CA/HCC/0065/2017 Hadille Gedara Sugath

Chandrawansha alias Janaka

High Court of Kurunegala

Case No: HC/134/2011

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

P. Kumararatnam, J.

COUNSEL : Yalith Wijesurendra for the Appellant.

Maheshika Silva, DSG for the Respondent.

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 09/05/2022

DECIDED ON : 03/06/2022

************************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted in the High Court of Kurunegala under Section 296

of the Penal Code for committing the murder of Ukkuwa Dewayalage

Chaminda Sampath Kularatna on or about 12th July 2009.

The trial commenced before the High Court Judge as the Appellant had opted

for a non-jury trial. After the conclusion of the prosecution case, the learned

High Court Judge had called for the defence and the Appellant had made a

dock statement and closed the case. After considering the evidence presented

by both parties, the learned High Court Judge had convicted the Appellant

under section 296 of the Penal code by his judgment dated 29/03/2017 and

sentenced him to death.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent to argue this matter in his absence due to the Covid 19

pandemic. Also, at the time of argument the Appellant was connected via

Zoom platform from prison.

Counsel appearing for the Appellant has submitted the following as a ground

of appeal: the evidence presented by the prosecution is contradictory and the

3 | P a g e

consequent effect on the credibility of its evidence does not justify the

conviction under Section 296 of the Penal Code but, if at all, only justify

under Section 297 of Penal Code.

Background of the Case albeit briefly is as follows

According to PW1 Kumarasinghe, the Appellant is his cousin. He was also

familiar with the deceased as the latter was a friend of the Appellant. On the

day of the incident the Appellant had confessed to the witness that he had

killed the deceased. As he did not believe him and when he questioned him

further, the Appellant had confirmed that he had killed the deceased. At that

time the Appellant had possessed a long knife which was blood-stained and

warned the witness to not to follow him. The witness had observed that the

Appellant was quite agitated. He had been made aware of the death of the

deceased only the following morning.

According to PW2 Niluka Sanjeewani who is the wife of the deceased, the

Appellant had set off with the deceased to Urumadiththa on the date of the

incident. They have left her house around 7.30 p.m. Around 9.00 p.m., the

Appellant had returned and told her that the deceased was drunk and had

asked her to take him home. Thereafter, she had gone to the fence and the

Appellant had then told her to switch off the lights but she had not complied.

She had proceeded to call out her husbands name but there had not been a

response. Then the Appellant had left in the direction of where he had

claimed the deceased to be. Thereafter she had gone up to the fence again,

this time accompanied by PW3 and continued looking for her husband.

However, neither the deceased nor the Appellant were to be found there at

that time. The following morning the body of the deceased had been found

about 200 meters away from the deceaseds house in a forest area.

PW3 Romanis, the father of the deceased, also corroborated the details

narrated by PW2 as stated above.

4 | P a g e

The prosecution had closed the case after leading investigation evidence and

marking the Post Mortem Report and the Government Analyst Report. When

the defence was called the Appellant made a dock statement and closed the

case.

In his dock statement the Appellant had denied confessing to PW1

Kumarasinghe and had taken up the position that he has had a land dispute

with PW1 and his family and therefore, this is a false allegation made against

him.

But this position was never suggested to PW1 when he was subjected to cross

examination. A contradiction was marked on the evidence of PW1 but it failed

to create any doubt on the evidence given by PW1. PW1 reiterated that the

Appellant had told him that he killed the deceased and that he had seen the

Appellant carrying a long knife which had blood on it, and these had not

been contradicted.

In Dharmasiri v. Republic of Sri Lanka [2010] 2 SLR 241 the court held:

Credibility of a witness is mainly a matter for the trial Judge.

Court of appeal will not lightly disturb the findings of trial Judge

with regard to the credibility of a witness unless such findings are

manifestly wrong. This is because the trial Judge has the

advantage of seeing the demeanour and deportment of the

witness..

Hence, relying on PW1s evidence has not caused any prejudice to the

Appellant.

PW2 the wife of the Appellant and PW3 the father of the deceased had both

confirmed that the deceased was last seen accompanied by the appellant. On

the date of the incident the Appellant had gone to the deceaseds house and

5 | P a g e

accompanied him to a place called Urumadiththa. This had been confirmed

by PW2 and PW3. The Appellant also had returned around 9.00 p.m. and

had informed them that the deceased being highly intoxicated had fallen

down and was lying on the ground. At this point the Appellant had told PW2

to come towards the fence after switching off the rear side light.

In a very recent judgment of the Indian Supreme Court Surajdeo Mahto v.

The State of Bihar (Cr A 1677 of 2011 decided on 4th August 2021-Indian

SC) (Citation: LL 2021 SC 351) Surya Kant J (with CJ N.V.Ramana,

Aniruddha Bose, J.) At page 18 the court held:

Briefly put, the last seen theory is applied where the time interval

between the point of when the accused and the deceased were

last seen together, and when the victim is found dead, is so small

that the possibility of any other person other than the accused

being the perpetrator of crime becomes impossible.

Hence, the Appellant owes an explanation as to the circumstances in which

he departed from the company of the deceased within the time frame of about

one and half hours.

After the Appellants revelation that the deceased was lying fallen being

intoxicated, PW2 and PW3 had walked in the said direction but were unable

to find the Appellant on that night. Hence, PW2 and PW3 had lodged a

complaint with the Grama Niladhari (PW5) on the following day and promptly

informed him that although the deceased had left with the Appellant last

night, he had failed to return home. PW5 in his evidence endorsed these

facts.

The Appellant in his dock statement admitted that he left with the deceased

and consumed liquor with him.

6 | P a g e

According to PW2, the Appellant had threatened both the deceased and

herself with death as the deceased had bullied him regarding a rumour that

the Appellants wife was having a clandestine affair with somebody else.

Neither the deceased nor this witness had taken the threat seriously. During

cross examination this witness had admitted that she did not tell this to the

police as the deceased had told her to disregard it as the Appellant was drunk

when he made the threat. Therefore, the two omissions which had been

highlighted by the defence fail to create an impact on the evidence of PW2.

In the case of Bharwada Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai v State of Gujarat [1983]

AIR SC 753 the court held that:

Discrepancies which do not go to the root of the matter and

shake the basic version of the witnesses therefore cannot be

annexed with undue importance. More so when the all-important

probabilities-factor echoes in favour of the version narrated by

the witnesses.

In the case of AG v. Sandanam Pitchai Mary Theresa (Supra) the court held

that:

Whilst internal contradictions or discrepancies would ordinarily

affect the trustworthiness of the witness statement, it is well

established that the Court must exercise its judgment on the

nature of the inconsistency or contradiction and whether they are

material to the fact in issue.

PW13 CI/Sanjeewa Bandara had conducted the investigations, visited the

scene of crime and taken steps to record statements from the witnesses. At

the scene of crime, he had recovered a knife sans any blood stains. Further

7 | P a g e

evidence revealed that the recovered knife belonged to the deceased. The said

knife was marked as P4 in the trial.

PW10 IP/Nihal had arrested the Appellant on 13/07/2009 and recorded his

statement. Based on his statement a knife was recovered which had been

marked as P3 in the trial. The Appellant was produced before a doctor and

the report do not mention any injury on the Appellant.

The Appellant in his dock statement denied that a knife was recovered based

on his statement to the police. But PW10 in his evidence without any

contradiction confirmed that a knife was recovered upon his statement.

The legality of the recovery made under Section 27(1) Evidence Ordinance

has been discussed in several cases in our jurisdiction.

According to Section 27(1) of the Evidence Ordinance-

When any fact is deposed to as discovered in consequence of

information received from a person accused of any offence, in

the custody of a police officer, so much of such information,

whether it amounts to a confession or not, as relates distinctly

to the fact thereby discovered may be proved.

The Supreme Court in the case of Somaratne Rajapakse Others v. Hon.

Attorney General (2010) 2 Sri L.R. 113 at 115 stated that:

A vital limitation on the scope of Section 27 of the Evidence

Ordinance is that only the facts which are distinctly related to

what has been discovered would be permitted in evidence. 'There

should be a clear nexus between the information given by the

accused and the subsequent discovery of a relevant fact. A

discovery made in terms of Section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance

8 | P a g e

discloses that the information given was true and that the

Accused had knowledge of the existence and the whereabouts of

the actual discovery.

Even though the Appellant stated in his dock statement that he was

subjected torture and he had singed the statement which led to the discovery

of the knife only under duress, not a single question was directed at the

police witnesses on that point when they gave evidence in the trial. Hence it

is very clear that the Appellant had taken up that position in his dock

statement after deliberation.

In this case the defence had admitted the Post Mortem Report of the deceased

and the Government Analyst Report under Section 420 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979. As such the prosecution did not call

PW7 and PW9 to give evidence in the court. At the end of the trial the said

Post Mortem Report and the Government Analyst Report were marked as X

and Y respectively through the court interpreter. (But the Appellants Medico

Legal Report had also been marked with the same letter -X. Page 93 of the

brief).

In Perera v. Attorney General (1998) 1 SLR 378 the court held:

An admission could be recorded at any stage of the trial, before

the case for the prosecution is closed. The purpose of recording an

admission is to dispense with the burden of proving the fact at the

trial

When a document is admitted under Section 420 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 and accepted as evidence the contents of the

document will be considered as evidence in the trial. At the same time the

9 | P a g e

prosecution will dispense with the burden of proving the fact at the trial.

Accordingly, in this case, the Post Mortem Report and the Government

Analyst Report had become evidence.

In the Post Mortem Report four external injuries and corresponding internal

injuries were clearly mentioned by the JMO. Further, the JMO had opined

that the death was caused due to haemorrhage and brain injuries in

consequence of cut injuries to the face. Although the Appellant contended

that both had consumed liquor, the Post Morten Report of the deceased did

not reveal any smell of alcohol emanating from the stomach.

The Government Analyst Report has further strengthened the prosecution

case, as a human blood sample had been identified on the knife which had

been recovered based on the statement made by the Appellant.

Considering the recovery of evidence under Section 27(1) of the Evidence

Ordinance, the prosecution has established the nexus between the alleged

recovery of the knife and the injuries on the deceased.

It was contended on behalf of the Appellant that the prosecution has failed

to prove the guilt of the Appellant beyond reasonable doubt as they rely on

unreliable circumstantial evidence and therefore, moves this court to acquit

the Appellant from the charge of murder.

It is well settled law that when the conviction is solely based on

circumstantial evidence, the prosecution must prove that no one else but the

Appellant had committed the crime. The below cited authorities set out the

position succinctly.

In King v. Abeywickrema Et Al 44 NLR 254 the court held that:

In order to base a conviction on circumstantial evidence the Jury

must be satisfied that the evidence was consistent with the guilt

of the accused and inconsistent with any reasonable hypothesis

of his innocence.

10 | P a g e

In the case of Tamil Nadu v. Rajendran Appeal (Cr.L) 917 of 1996 the Indian

Supreme Court observed that:

In a case of circumstantial evidence when an incriminating

circumstance is put to the accused and the said accused either

offers no explanation or offers an explanation which is found to

be untrue, then the same becomes an additional link in the chain

of circumstances to make it complete.

In this case the deceased was last seen leaving with the Appellant and was

found dead with cut injuries about 200 meters away from his house. The

deceaseds father and his wife had looked for the deceased after the Appellant

informed that the deceased was lying close to the fence after consuming

liquor. The Appellant had gone to PW1s house and confessed that he killed

the deceased carrying a blood-stained knife. A knife was recovered upon the

statement of the Appellant and was sent to the Government Analyst

Department for analysis. According to the Government Analyst Report

human blood had been identified on the knife which had been marked as P3.

On the date of the incident the Appellant had told PW2 to come near the

fence after switching off the rear side light. This amounts to suspicious

conduct on the part of the Appellant as he had already threatened both the

deceased and PW2 with death on a previous occasion.

Considering all the circumstances, the only cogent inference that can be

drawn is that the Appellant had committed the offence.

The Appellant in his dock statement denied the allegation levelled against

him. Though he has not been bound by law to offer any explanation, he failed

to offer an explanation when strong and incriminating evidence had been led

against him.

11 | P a g e

In the case of Somaratne Rajapakse Others v Hon. Attorney General

(2010) 2 Sri L.R. 113 Justice Bandaranayake observed that:

With all this damning evidence against the Appellants with the

charges including murder and rape the Appellants did not offer

any explanation with regard to any of the matters referred to

above. Although there cannot be a direction that the accused

person must explain each and every circumstance relied on by the

prosecution and the fundamental principle being that no person

accused of a crime is bound to offer any explanation of his conduct

there are permissible limitations in which it would be necessary

for a suspect to explain the circumstances of suspicion which are

attached to him.

In this case the prosecution had led strongly incriminating circumstantial

evidence against the Appellant and the circumstances established were

consistent with the Appellants guilt and inconsistent with his innocence.

Hence, I proceed to dismiss his appeal.

The Registrar is directed to send a copy of this judgment to the High Court

of Kurunegala along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL