==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA-WRT-0977-25

Page 1 of 5

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Orders in the

nature Writs of Certiorari, Mandamus and

Prohibition under and in terms of Article 140 of

the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Hatharasing Gamage Siripala,

No. 107/G/25

Arangapolawatte Road, Weliwita,

Kaduwela.

Petitioner

Vs

1. Dr. K. D. Pradeep Wijesinghe,

Deputy Director General.

National Hospital of Sri Lanka,

Colombo 10.

2. R. D. M. Premasiri,

Chief Accountant,

National Hospital of Sri Lanka,

Colombo 10.

3. M. A. J. Abeysinghe,

Administration Officer,

Court of Appeal Case No: WRT/0977/25

CA-WRT-0977-25

Page 2 of 5

Secretary of the Hospital (iv),

National Hospital of Sri Lanka,

Colombo 10.

4. Mr. P. P. S. R. de Silva,

Additional Secretary (Procurement),

Ministry of Health,

Suwasiripaya,

Rev. Baddegama Wimalawansa Thero

Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

5. D. Vithanage,

16/3/A,

37/2/A,

Rokshana Mawatha,

Aggona, Angoda.

And

D. Vithanage,

Milk shop,

Infront of neuro treatment unit,

National Hospital of Sri Lanka,

Colombo 10.

6. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents

CA-WRT-0977-25

Page 3 of 5

Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J.

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Counsel : Manohara De Silva instructed by Chalani De Alwis for the Petitioner. Prabhashanee Javasekara, S.C. for the 01st to 04th and 06th Respondents.

P. Nethrapan Dias instructed by N. J. Weerasekara for the 05th Respondent.

Written Submissions

of the Petitioner

tendered on : Not tendered

Written Submissions

of the 1st to 4th and

6th Respondents

tendered on : Not tendered

Written Submissions

of the 5th Respondent

tendered on : 28.01.2026.

Decided on : 20.03.2026.

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

When this matter came on before us on 17.12.2025 for support of the application

for notice, learned State Counsel for the 1st to 4th and 6th Respondents had taken

up several objections with regard to the maintainability of the instant application

including suppression of facts and want of necessary parties and all parties

CA-WRT-0977-25

Page 4 of 5

agreed to file respective written submissions on the preliminary objection and 1st

to 4th and 6th Respondents were directed to file their written submissions on or

before 28.01.2026 with notice to the Petitioner and the Petitioner was directed

to file his written submissions three weeks from that date and the matter was

reserved for order on the purported preliminary objections sought to be raised

by the learned State Counsel for the 1st to 4th and 6th Respondents on

30.03.2026.

However, it is regrettable to observe that the 1st to 4th and 6th Respondents had

not furnished written submissions to Court up until now in total contravention

of the direction made by this Court on them as aforesaid and hence, the

purported preliminary objection sought to be raised by the learned State Counsel

with regard to the maintainability of the instant action was neither elaborated

nor substantiated.

I would therefore, hold that the purported preliminary objection sought to be

raised by the learned State Counsel for the 1st to 4th and 6th Respondents remains

unproved, unsubstantiated and unsupported.

However, the 5th Respondent had in his written submissions, raised a number

of preliminary objections as to the maintainability of the instant application. A

careful perusal of the record however, shows that the 5th Respondent had never,

sought leave of this Court to raise preliminary objections as to the

maintainability of the instant application and therefore, neither the Petitioner

nor the other Respondents to the instant application was aware of the

preliminary objections so raised to Court by the 5th Respondent for the first time

in his written submissions without first obtaining leave of this Court and with

notice to all the other parties to the instant application and therefore, law does

not permit this Court to consider a preliminary objection as such raised by the

5th Respondent in such manner as enumerated above in total violation of the

principles of Natural Justice and therefore, the 5th Respondent is directed to

raise any preliminary objections as to the maintainability of the instant action

CA-WRT-0977-25

Page 5 of 5

or otherwise if so advised, with leave of this Court first had and obtained for that

purpose and with due notice to all the other parties to the instant application.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL