IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under

section 331(1) of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of

1979 read with Article 138 of the

Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

The Commission to Investigate

Allegations of bribery or

Corruption,

No. 36, Malalasekara Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

C.A. Case No. HCC/206-208/2019 Complainant

High Court of Colombo Vs.

Case No. HCB/1696/2007

1. Wasala Mudiyanselage Gedara

Gamini Senarath Bandara.

2. Nishshanka Arachchige

Priyantha.

3. Kanagarathna Wijekoonlage

Chandrasiri Kularathna

Wijekoon.

Accused

2

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Wasala Mudiyanselage Gedara

Gamini Senarath Bandara.

2. Nishshanka Arachchige

Priyantha

3. Kanagarathna Wijekoonlage

Chandrasiri Kularathna

Wijekoon

Accused Appellants

Vs.

The commission to Investigate

Allegations of bribery or

Corruption,

Complainant-Respondent

BEFORE : K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J (P/CA)

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J

COUNSEL : Nalin Ladduwahetti, PC with Hafeel Farisz, Kavithri

Obeysekara and Rajith Samarasekara for the

1st Accused- Appellant.

Duminda De Alwis with Charuni De Alwis for the

2nd Accused-Appellant.

Shantha Perera, PC with Sweeni Suraweera and

Mahanama Dissanayake for the 3rd Accused-

Appellant.

Sudharshana De Silva, DSG with Thanuja Bandara

and Gayan Madawage for the Respondent.

3

WRITTEN SUBMISSION

TENDERED ON : 28.07.2020 (On behalf of the 1st Accused-Appellant)

30.07.2020 (On behalf of the 2st Accused-Appellant)

26.06.2020 (On behalf of the 3rd Accused-Appellant)

21.08.2020 (On behalf of the Respondent)

ARGUED ON : 15.09.2022 and 16.09.2022

DECIDED ON : 20.10.2022

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J.

The three accused-appellants were police officers attached to

Galenbindunuwewa Police Station at the time of the incident. The

complainant, PW-1 was engaged in an illicit liquor business. In the High

Court of Colombo, the three accused-appellants were indicted under

the Bribery Act for soliciting and accepting bribes from Thennakoon

Mudiyanselage Gnanadasage Chandana Kumara Dissanayake, (PW-1)

to refrain from charging for all goda barrels taken into custody and to

charge only for a few of those barrels.

The first accused-appellant was charged under sections 16(b) and 19(c)

of the Act on counts one and two for soliciting a bribe of Rs.20,000/-

from the said Thennakoon Mudiyanselage Gnanadasage Chandana

Kumara Dissanayake. The first accused-appellant was also charged

under sections 16(b) and 19(c) of the Act on counts four and five for

accepting a bribe of Rs.10,000/- from the said Chandana Kumara

Dissanayake.

The 2nd accused-appellant was charged on count three under section

19(c) of the Act for accepting a bribe of Rs.5,000/- from the said

Chandana Kumara Dissanayake.

4

The 3rd accused-appellant was charged on counts six and seven under

sections 16(b) and 19(c) read with section 25(2) of the Act for abetting

the 1st accused to accept a bribe of Rs.10,000/- from the said Kumara

Dissanayake.

After trial, all three accused-appellants were found guilty by the

judgment dated 08.03.2019. The 1st accused was convicted and

sentenced for counts 1, 2, 4, and 5, the 2nd accused was convicted and

sentenced for count 3 and the 3rd accused was convicted and sentenced

for counts 5 and 6. This appeal is preferred against the said convictions

and sentences.

Prior to the hearing, written submissions were filed on behalf of all

parties. At the hearing of the appeal, the learned Presidents Counsel

for the 1st appellant, the learned Counsel for the 2nd appellant, the

learned Presidents Counsel for the 3rd appellant, and the learned

Deputy Solicitor General for the respondent made oral submissions.

The following is a summary of the facts relating to the prosecution case:

The three-accused appellants were police officers attached to

Galenbindunuwewa Police Station, at the time of the alleged offences.

The complainant, PW-1, was an illicit liquor dealer who had been doing

this illegal business with one of his friends named Arunasiri (PW-2).

According to the prosecution, on 24th July 2005, the Officer in Charge

of the Police Station Galenbidunuwewa (PW-6) arranged a police team

led by sergeant Bandara (1st accused) to raid the complainant's and his

partner Anurasiri's illegal liquor business. The team of police officers

had raided the place on that day. Five Goda barrels were taken into

custody, and Udara Lakmal Bandara (PW-5), the brother-in-law of

Anurasiri, was also arrested. On the same day, the 1st accused met the

5

complainant and Anurasiri on their way and told them that they had

arrested some barrels of goda that belonged to the complainant and

Arunasiri. According to the prosecution, the 1st accused demanded

Rs.20,000/- not to charge for all those goda barrels found. In the

afternoon of the same day, the complainant and Arunasiri had found

Rs.5,000/- and the said Rs.5,000/- was given to the 2nd accused when

they met the 2nd accused-appellant with Sergeant Senaka on the way.

Since PW-1 could not find the balance Rs.15,000/-, he called the

Bribery Commission on 25.07.2005 and informed them about the

matter. Accordingly, on 26.07.2005, around 5 p.m., a raid was

organized. The raid was not successful on that day and was re-arranged

for 27.07.2005. On the 27th also, PW-1 and PW-3 (decoy) made two

attempts to give the balance money but were unsuccessful. Thereafter,

when the 3rd appellant, PC Wijekoon, arrived near T-Stores, PW-1 gave

Rs.15,000/- to the 3rd appellant, stating that this was the money

requested by the first accused and that the balance of Rs.5,000/- would

be paid in four to five days. When the 3rd appellant accepted the money,

he was arrested by officers of the Bribery Commission, according to the

prosecution. Thereafter, on the instructions of the raiding officers, the

complainant and the decoy were asked to go and meet the 1st accused

at the police station. When the 1st appellant saw them, he proceeded

to the boutique near the police station. Then, the 1st accused was also

arrested.

After the prosecution case, the three accused-appellants made unsworn

statements from the dock denying the charges leveled against them.

Sergeant Senaka was also called in evidence on behalf of the 2nd

accused-appellant.

6

Although a preliminary objection was taken on behalf of the 1st and 2nd

appellants that the indictment has no force in law and is ultra vires on

the basis that the said indictment has been signed by the Director

General without any direction being issued by the three commissioners,

the learned Presidents Counsel for the 1st appellant or the learned

Counsel for the 2nd appellant did not pursue the said objection. They

made submissions on the facts of the case, urging that the learned High

Court Judges judgment be set aside and the appellants be acquitted of

all charges against them.

Furthermore, although several grounds of appeal were set out in the

written submissions tendered on behalf of the appellants, all three

learned counsel appeared for the three appellants centered their

arguments on the main ground of not correctly evaluating the

improbable prosecution version and probable defense version in coming

to a conclusion by the learned High Court Judge.

The learned Presidents Counsel for the 1st appellant contended that

there was no evidence against the 1st appellant with regard to soliciting

and/or accepting any bribe from any person. He contended further that

there was no nexus between the 1st and the 3rd appellants, although

they were arrested and charged for accepting a bribe of Rs.10,000/-.

While advancing his arguments to demonstrate that the prosecution

version is improbable, the learned Presidents Counsel contended that

there was absolute motivation to fabricate the charges against the 1st

appellant, as he was standing in between corrupt police officials and an

illicit liquor seller.

The learned counsel for the 2nd appellant contended that although

PW-1 stated that he went with Police Sergeant Senaka on a motorcycle

and gave Rs.5,000/- as a bribe to the 2nd appellant, the said police

7

officer gave evidence on behalf of the 2nd appellant and testified that he

did not go anywhere with the 2nd appellant. Therefore, the learned

Counsel for the 2nd appellant submitted that count three against the

2nd appellant has not been proved beyond a reasonable doubt.

The learned Presidents Counsel for the 3rd appellant contended that

since the three attempts that were made to give money to the 3rd

appellant failed, Rs.10,000/- was forcibly offered to the 3rd appellant,

and PW-1 and Bribery Officers fabricated a false story against the 3rd

appellant.

In response, the learned Deputy Solicitor General for the respondent

stated that minor discrepancies in lay witnesses' testimony are to be

expected, but PW-1's testimony is corroborated by PW-3's (decoy)

testimony, and the prosecution has presented a plausible story. The

Learned Deputy Solicitor General contended further that improbable

dock statements of the appellants do not cast reasonable doubt on the

prosecution case.

When making submissions, the learned Presidents Counsel for the 1st

appellant pointed out certain contradictions per se, inter se, and other

flaws in the prosecution case as well. However, I wish to consider first,

the issue whether the prosecution case is improbable because if a

reasonable doubt is cast on the issue of the probability of the

prosecution case, the necessity does not arise to consider the other

matters raised by the learned Presidents Counsel.

Solicitation of Rs.20,000/- (Counts 1 and 2)

In dealing with the first and second counts relating to the solicitation

of Rs.20,000/- as a bribe, the manner in which the first charge was

8

framed is important. The following is the first charge in the indictment

filed in the High Court:

2005 24

22835

01

,

.20,000/-

16() .

In perusing the first charge, it is apparent that the 1st accused-

appellant was charged on the basis that the goda taken into custody

was taken from Thennakoon Mudiyanselage Gnanadasage Chandana

Kumara Dissanayakas custody while he was involved in manufacturing

and selling illegal liquor.

However, PW-1, the said Chandana Kumara, testifying on behalf of the

prosecution, stated unequivocally that when the goda barrels were

taken into custody, neither he nor his supporters were present there.

PW-5, Udara Lakmal Bandara, testified that he was at home when he

was taken by police to a place in the jungle where the goda barrels were,

and that the police subsequently filed a case against him. The learned

Deputy Solicitor General appearing for the respondent admitted that no

one was present when the goda barrels were taken into custody. If this

was the case, the first charge, which was brought on the basis that the

goda was taken into custody from the possession of Chandana Kumara,

who was engaged in manufacturing and selling illicit liquor, could not

be maintained.

9

The learned Deputy Solicitor General contended that PW-1 had

admitted that the goda belonged to him. Even if it is so, the first charge

could not be brought on the basis that the goda was taken from

Chandana Kumara, who was engaged in the manufacture and sale of

illicit liquor, when the goda was found in the jungle and not in the

possession of anybody. In any case, the prosecution has brought the

first charge for soliciting a bribe of Rs.20,000/- from PW-1 to file a case

only for a few barrels of goda instead of all the barrels of goda taken

into custody.

Apart from the aforesaid incorrect manner of framing of the first charge,

it is apparent that the evidence regarding the solicitation charge is also

uncertain and doubtful. On page 203 of the appeal brief, PW-3, the

decoy stated that Rs.20,000/- was demanded to file the case for only

one barrel of goda. PW-1 stated on page 125 of the appeal brief that the

first appellant told him that one case had been filed against Udara

Lakmal and money was demanded not to file another case. Hence, it is

apparent that the evidence of PW-1 and PW-3 regarding the purpose of

soliciting the bribe is contradictory.

Apart from that, PW-1 has made contradictory statements on soliciting

money on different occasions. PW-1 stated in one occasion

(Page 124

of the appeal brief). Another occasion, he stated 5

, , .20,000/-

. (Page 139 of the appeal brief). Again, he stated

. , . (Page 154

of the appeal brief).

In light of the contradictory positions taken by PW-1 from time to time,

it appears that there is some truth in the defence version that PW-1 had

considered the raid carried out by the appellants as an obstacle for him

10

to run his illicit liquor business by giving regular bribes to the other

police officers in the area, so a false story was fabricated against the

appellants. As a result of the aforesaid contradictory prosecution

evidence and the probable defence version, a reasonable doubt is cast

about the solicitation of Rs.20,000/-. Hence, I hold that the learned

High Court Judges finding that the solicitation charges have been

proved beyond a reasonable doubt is incorrect and that the first and

second charges relating to the solicitation of Rs.20,000/- have not been

proved beyond a reasonable doubt. Furthermore, it is to be noted that

if there is doubt about soliciting the bribe, there would be doubt about

the acceptance of the bribe as well, because there can be no acceptance

without a solicitation.

Acceptance of Rs.5,000/- (Count 3)

The third count has been brought against the second appellant for

accepting Rs.5,000/- as a bribe. The 1st appellant had no connection

for accepting the said Rs.5,000/- according to the charge. So, the

prosecution version is that the 1st appellant demanded Rs.20,000/- and

the 2nd appellant accepted Rs.5,000/- from the said amount demanded.

However, fourth and fifth counts have been brought against the 1st

appellant in terms of Section 89(b) of the Bribery Act for the

Rs.10,000/- purported to be accepted by the 3rd appellant, on the basis

that the 3rd appellant accepted the same on behalf of the 1st appellant.

Accordingly, the third appellant was charged under the sixth and

seventh counts for abetting the first accused in accepting the said

Rs.10,000/-.

According to the prosecution evidence, when PW-1 gave Rs.5,000/- to

the 2nd appellant, the decoy was not there. So, the third count has to

be proved only on the evidence of PW-1 and his helper (PW-2) in the

illicit liquor business. According to the PW-1 and PW-2, when they met

11

the 2nd appellant on the day the goda raid was carried out, the PW-1

gave the 2nd appellant Rs.5,000/- near the petrol shed when he was

with Police Sergeant Senaka.

Police Sergeant Senaka was a police officer attached to the

Galenbindunuwewa Police Station at that time. He testified on behalf of

the 2nd appellant and stated that he had never gone with the 2nd

appellant on a motorcycle. In addition, the 2nd appellant also denied the

acceptance of Rs.5,000/- in his dock statement.

Therefore, with regard to the acceptance of Rs.5,000/-, the evidence to

be evaluated is PW-1 and PW-2s evidence against Police Sergeant

Senakas evidence and the 2nd appellants dock statement. In his dock

statement, the 2nd appellant denied the acceptance of Rs.5,000/-. In

evaluating the evidence, I am of the view that there is no basis to reject

2nd appellants dock statement, which was corroborated by Police

Sergeant Senakas evidence. In the circumstances, doubt arises on the

prosecution version as to whether Rs.5,000/- was given to the 2nd

appellant while PW-1 was accompanying police sergeant Senaka. Upon

the said reasonable doubt, it should be concluded that the third count

against the 2nd appellant has not been proved beyond a reasonable

doubt.

Acceptance of Rs.10,000/- (Counts 4, 5, 6 and 7)

Now, I proceed to consider the acceptance of Rs.10,000/-. The fourth

and fifth counts are against the 1st appellant for accepting the said

Rs.10,000/- and the sixth and seventh counts are against the 3rd

appellant for abetting the 1st appellant to accept the said Rs.10,000/-.

Therefore, if the prosecution story about the acceptance of Rs.10,000/-

could be accepted without reasonable doubt, the fourth and fifth counts

12

against the 1st appellant as well as the sixth and seventh counts against

the 3rd appellant would be proved. Similarly, if the prosecution story

about the acceptance of Rs.10,000/- could not be accepted without

reasonable doubt, the two counts regarding acceptance would not be

proved. Accordingly, sixth and seventh abetting charges would also fail.

Undisputedly, Rs.10,000/- has been given by PW-1 to the 3rd appellant.

The 1st appellant was at least not in the vicinity of the place where the

said money was handed over. The 1st appellant was arrested when he

reached a boutique near the police station, according to the

prosecution.

PW-6, the OIC confirms that all the items taken into custody during the

raid and also Udara Lakmal, the boy who was arrested as the suspect

in this raid were handed over to the police station by 4.00 p.m. on

24.07.2005. OIC also confirms that the plaint was filed against Udara

Lakmal in the Anuradhapura Magistrates Court on 28.07.2005. Those

facts are also bolstered by the plaint filed in the Magistrates Court,

marked P-2. In addition, OIC, PW-6 clearly stated that notes were made

and the pliant was filed only for one barrel of goda. He also testified that

the notes were made on the same day of the raid. However, the notes

have been pasted on 25.07.2005.

The contention of the learned Presidents Counsel for the 1st appellant

was that everything was finalized by 27.07.2005 to file the case on

28.07.2005, and thus giving a bribe on the 27th is improbable because

PW-1 could have known that there was no purpose in giving a bribe on

the 27th because nothing could be changed in the case to be filed on the

next date.

13

The learned Deputy Solicitor General replied that although all notes had

been made by July 24th, 2005, PW-1 had no way of knowing what

happened in the police station. There is merit in this contention.

However, PW-1 knew that a case would be filed in the Magistrates Court

on 28.07.2005. The reason that the PW-1 told the 3rd appellant for

giving only Rs.10,000/- and promising to give the balance Rs.5,000/-

within a few days was that the case was coming up on the 28th. Decoy,

PW-3, has also stated the same reason for giving only Rs.10,000/-. The

case that came up on 28.07.2005 was the case filed against Udara

Lakmal for the goda taken into custody. PW-1 also knew that the case

would be filed not against him but against Lakmal because he stated

that on the date of the raid, Lakmal was arrested by the police and later

released on bail.

Therefore, although PW-1 did not know when the notes were made and

finalized in the police station, any person with common sense would

understand that everything would be finalized by 27th if a case is filed

on the 28th. Especially, a person like PW-1 who was engaged in the

illicit liquor business would know these things very well.

Under these circumstances, PW-1 could easily understand that giving

Rs.10,000/- as a bribe serves no purpose, even though the case was

scheduled to be filed for one barrel of goda or five barrels of goda. If

the case had been filed for one barrel of goda, there was no need to give

a bribe. If the case had been filed for five barrels, there was no purpose

of giving a bribe because it could not be changed. The prosecution

witness, the OIC, confirms that no changes could be made under any

circumstance after the productions were handed over to the police

station and notes were made.

14

There could be an argument that this kind of changes are taking place

in the police station. It can happen, but obviously, it should have

happened with the knowledge of the OIC of the police station. In this

instance, the OIC sent a special police team for this raid because he

had received a petition that other police officers normally assigned to

raiding duties take bribes. The 3rd appellant was attached to the traffic

division of the police station. Hence, the OIC would not certainly assist

the appellants in changing notes in this particular case. Therefore, it is

apparent that the appellants had no opportunity to change notes.

This court also considered whether it was possible to file another case

for the other four barrels of goda allegedly taken into custody, if the

PW-1 had not given the balance Rs.15,000/-. It is evident that the

appellants who went for this raid could not file another case apart from

the case filed against Udara Lakmal because once the productions were

handed over to the police and the case was filed, no other case could be

filed based on the same raid. Therefore, when PW-1 could know very

well that giving Rs.10,000/- on 27.07.2005 was pointless, the allegation

of accepting Rs.10,000/- is improbable.

On the other hand, once the notes were made and the productions were

handed over on 25.07.2005, the 1st appellant knew very well that they

could not increase the quantity of goda and file a case. Even in those

circumstances, the prosecution evidence was that on one occasion on

26.07.2005 and two occasions on 27.07.2005, the 3rd appellant refused

to accept money even though the money was offered on those three

occasions. When the money was offered on July 26th, PW-1 stated that

the 3rd appellant went away in his vehicle saying he wanted to go to

Medawachchiya Courts. on July 27, 2005, when the money was

offered again, PW-1 did not accept it and told them to come down the

road. Yet again, on the second occasion, on July 27, 2005, PW-1 stated

15

that he gave money but the 3rd appellant did not accept. Therefore, it

is apparent even though PW-1 and PW-3, the decoy, together attempted

to give money to the 3rd appellant on those three occasions, he refused

in accepting the money. Ultimately, PW-1 and PW-3, the decoy, say that

on 27.07.2005, the 3rd appellant accepted Rs.10,000/- in a by-road of

the Anuradhapura Road. The 3rd and 1st appellants both knew very well

by 26.07.2005 that they couldnt do anything even though the bribe

was not given because they had finalized everything to file a court case

by that date. If the 1st and 3rd appellants wanted to accept a bribe in

such a situation, they would accept the money whenever it was offered,

and the 3rd appellant would certainly not refuse to accept the money in

this manner.

Another important matter to be considered is that on all three occasions

when PW-1 offered money to the 3rd appellant and he refused, the decoy

was present. On the fourth occasion also, the decoy was present. They

travelled by motorcycle from one place to another. The reason for his

refusal to accept money would be that he may have some suspicion. A

suspicion could arise, when there was an unknown person (decoy) with

PW-1 at all times. So, if the 3rd appellant asked PW-1 to come alone

without the other person, there was some basis for not accepting the

bribe and asking him to come again. Without expressing any objection

to PW-1 accompanying the said unknown person (decoy), the 3rd

appellants request for PW-1 to come to various places from time to time

is implausible.

The position taken up by the 1st appellant in his dock statement that

on the fourth occasion also, when PW-1 and PW-3 attempted to give

him money, he refused, and thereafter they forcibly offered it to him,

and then he was arrested.

16

Regarding the dock statement of the 1st appellant, the learned Deputy

Solicitor General stated that if a bribe was offered and the 3rd appellant

did not want to take it, what could be expected from him is to file a

complaint for bribery. Since he has not done so on three occasions, the

learned Deputy Solicitor General contended that his dock statement is

improbable. It is my view that when bribes are offered, there may be

instances where complaints are made. However, it cannot be assumed

that all police officers who do not want to take bribes will necessarily

complain whenever bribes are offered. Hence, I regret that I am unable

to agree with the contention that the 1st appellants dock statement is

improbable.

In the aforesaid circumstances, I am of the view that not only this dock

statement could not be rejected but also it raises a doubt as to whether

PW-1 together with bribery officers, forcibly offered money and

attempted to show that their raid was successful because they had

experienced three unsuccessful attempts.

In a criminal case, if the dock statement casts reasonable doubt on the

prosecution case, the accused is entitled to an acquittal. In the case at

hand, the defence version not only casts a reasonable doubt on the

prosecution case but is also more probable than the prosecution version

for the reasons stated above. Therefore, I hold that the acceptance of

Rs.10,000/- has not been proved beyond a reasonable doubt. Hence,

charges 4, 5, 6, and 7 fail.

Since the charges of solicitation of a bribe and the charges of acceptance

of bribes and abetting to accept the bribe have not been proved beyond

a reasonable doubt for the aforementioned reasons, I hold that the 1st,

2nd, and 3rd appellants are entitled to be acquitted of all charges against

them.

17

Accordingly, the judgment of the High Court dated 08.03.2019, the

convictions and the sentences imposed on the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd accused-

appellants are set aside.

The 1st, 2nd, and 3rd appellants are acquitted of all the charges against

them.

The appeals of the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd appellants are allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K. Priyantha Fernando, J (P/CA)

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL