==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 15

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal in terms of

Section 331(1) of the Criminal Procedure

Act No.15 of 1979.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant

CA HCC 226/23 Vs.

High Court of Embilipitiya

Case No. HC 117/2019 Padalaangala Ganawasi Thero alias

Manathunga Arachchige Jayantha

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Padalaangala Ganawasi Thero alias

Manathunga Arachchige Jayantha

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

Page 2 of 15

The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Amal Ranaraja, J.

Counsel: Saliya Peiris P.C., Geeth Karunaratne, Sithara Chathurangi

and Mark Fernando for the Accused-Appellant.

Azard Nawavi, A.S.G., for the Respondent.

Argued on: 24.03.2026

Judgment on: 04.05.2026

Judgment

AMAL RANARAJA, J.

1. The accused-appellant (hereinafter referred to as appellant) has been

indicted in the High Court of Embilipitiya in High Court Case No. HC

117/19. The charge in the indictment is as follows;

Page 3 of 15

01. That between the dates of 01st of March, 2018 and 31st of May,

2018, within the jurisdiction of this Court, in Sri Gnanaloka Mulika

Privena, Sevanagala, you in order to gain some sexual gratification,

have used a part of your body, namely your male genitalia on the

body of one Mahagama Ariyagnana Thero, alias Kalansuriya Janith

Dilshan, alias Suriyawewa Sudheera Thero, a person under 16

years of age, by placing it between his thighs. Thereby, you have

committed an offence of ‘Grave Sexual Abuse’ punishable under

Section 365B (2)(b) of the Penal Code as amended by Penal Code

(Amendment) Act No.22 of 1995, Penal Code (Amendment) Act

No.29 of 1998 and Penal Code (Amendment) Act No.16 of 2006.

2. At the conclusion of the trial the learned High Court judge has convicted

the appellant of the charge and sentenced him as follows;

i. Imposed a fine of Rs.10,000.00 with a term of 12 months

simple imprisonment in default. Further, has imposed a jail

term of 20 years rigorous imprisonment, in addition to the

fine.

The appellant has also been directed to pay a sum Rs.

100,000.00 as compensation to PW01, with a term of 12

months simple imprisonment in default

3. The appellant, aggrieved by the conviction, judgement together with the

sentencing order has preferred the instant appeal of this Court.

Page 4 of 15

Case of the Prosecution

4. At the time of the alleged incident referenced in the charge, PW01 has been

a student monk residing in a Pirivena. The appellant has also been residing

at the same Pirivena, though not as a student monk. PW01 has shared a

room within the premises with three other student monks, while the

appellant has occupied a separate room allocated to him.

5. On the night of the alleged incident, PW01 and the three other student

monks have been in their shared room, one asleep and the others awake,

having retired for the day. The appellant has allegedly knocked on their

door and asked PW01 if he was in possession of a bottle of petrol. When

PW01 has responded in the negative, the appellant has allegedly pushed

PW01 onto a mattress on the floor of the room. He has then proceeded to

undress both PW01 and himself as described and subsequently, sexually

abused PW01 as detailed in the charge.

Case of the Appellant

6. The appellant has denied the allegations, contending he has been framed

due to animosity from the father of PW01.

7. When the matter was taken up for argument the learned President’s

Counsel, appearing on behalf of the appellant urged the following grounds

of appeal;

i. Has the learned High Court Judge failed to consider the

improbability of the evidence of PW01?

Page 5 of 15

ii. The prosecution has failed to call PW03, the witness material

to establish the prosecution’s version and therefore, an

adverse inference can be drawn against the prosecution’s

case.

iii. Whether the learned High Court Judge has erred in evaluating

the contradictions of PW02, marked by the defence which go

to the root of the matter.

iv. Whether the learned High Court Judge has failed to properly

analyse the evidence adduced by the defence.

v. Whether the sentence imposed on the appellant was excessive

or unjustifiable.

8. The test of probability is a cornerstone of legal, judicial and investigative

analysis used to gauge the credibility and reliability of a testimony. Instead

of relying solely on a witness’s demeanour, this test subjects his story to

an examination of whether it aligns with common sense, surrounding

circumstances, and existing evidence.

9. When assessing witness credibility, the test of probability evaluates several

factors, i.e. whether the testimony is consistent with itself (internally) and

with established facts or documentary evidence. Does the narrative make

sense given the time, place, and conditions of the event. Does the witness’s

version align with how people typically behave, or does it seem illogical or

impossible?

Page 6 of 15

10. Significant contradictions in a witness’s evidence can heavily affect his

credibility and leave his testimony improbable. A witness’s account could

be weighed against a competing one, thereafter the more plausible version

taken into consideration upon the application of the test of probability.

Page 7 of 15

Vide Pages 68 & 69 of the Case Brief

11. It is alleged that the appellant knocked on the door of the room occupied

by PW01 and others at approximately 11.00 pm on the day in question.

This late hour is typically when most individuals would have retired for

the day and would be asleep. Given these circumstances it could be

inferred, that if the appellant had intended to commit an act of sexual

abuse of PW01, it was meant to be done in secrecy.

12. However, according to PW01’s testimony, two of the other student monks

occupying the room had been awake, when the appellant allegedly pushed

PW01 onto a mattress on the floor of the room. Thereby, the appellant

would have been exposed to the student monks who were awake and any

secrecy anticipated brought to nought. Furthermore, the appellant has

occupied an independently allocated room at the same premises. However,

the appellant has not attempted to take PW01 to his own room.

13. In such a situation it becomes questionable whether the appellant would

have committed the alleged offence at the scene it was supposed to have

occurred. The circumstances also raise another question; why did the

appellant not take PW01 to his own room if he actually committed an

offence against PW01? Such an action would not have also exposed the

appellant, instead creating a ready-made situation for the alleged offence

to be committed in complete secrecy.

14. Accordingly, these circumstances referred to in the testimony of PW01 do

not align with how an individual would typically behave when committing

an offence of the nature the appellant is accused of in secrecy, thereby

challenging the credibility of the accusation.

Page 8 of 15

15. Also, PW01 has testified that the monk who later informed his father

(PW01’s father) learned about the alleged incident from PW01 the day after

it occurred. This monk has then informed PW01’s father, leading to a

police complaint. This entire sequence of events, from the incident to the

police complaint, reportedly has taken place within three or four days.

Following the police complaint an investigation has commenced. As a part

of this investigation, PW01 has undergone a medical examination

conducted by Dr. G.R.H.C. Gamlath, a medico-legal officer at the

Embilipitiya District General Hospital (PW07).

16. Prior to the medical examination, PW01 has provided a brief account of

the incident to Dr. Gamlath. In his statement, PW01 has indicated that the

alleged incident involving the appellant had occurred approximately two

weeks prior to the date of examination. This stands in contrast to PW01’s

court testimony which suggested the incident happened only a few days

before the police complaint was made (within the three to four day timeline

mentioned above).

17. In court, PW01 has also testified about a separate incident where another

monk allegedly attempted to sexually abuse PW01 before the appellant’s

alleged actions. However, PW01 has not disclosed any information about

this earlier attempted abuse to Dr. Gamlath prior to the medical

examination.

18. It is argued that these inconsistencies are significant. That they relate to

crucial aspects of the case, i.e. the timing of the alleged offence, and the

occurrence of a prior, similar, attempted incident. Also, that such details

can be material to understanding the sequence of events and the overall

context of the allegations.

Page 9 of 15

19. As previously established, two student monks have been awake in the

room with PW01 during the alleged incident between the appellant and

PW01. One of these individuals, Samananda Thero (PW03), has been listed

as a prosecution witness. However, for an undisclosed reason, the

prosecution has refrained from calling this witness. Had Samananda

Thero’s evidence been presented, it would have addressed and clarified the

discrepancies in PW01’s testimony. The prosecution’s failure to do so

leaves PW01’s testimony internally inconsistent and improbable.

20. In the case of The King v Seneviratne 1936 NLR 38, Lord Roche has stated,

“Witnesses essential to the unfolding of the narrative on which the

prosecution is based must be called by the prosecution, whether in the

result the effect of their testimony is for or against the case for the

prosecution”.

21. Further, an adverse presumption under Section 114(f) of the Evidence

Ordinance could be drawn against the prosecution, as the evidence of

PW03 which was absolutely necessary to corroborate the testimony of

PW01 has been withheld by such party.

22. In the case of Kumara De Silva and two Others v Attorney General 2010

SLR (2) 169, Sarath De Abrew J has stated,

“Question of an adverse presumption under Section 114 (f) arises only

where a witness whose evidence is necessary to unfold the narrative is

wilfully withheld by the prosecution and the failure to call such witness

constitutes a vital missing link in the prosecution case.”

23. During the cross examination of PW02, i.e. the father of PW01, four

contradictions have been identified by the appellant and marked වි 01 to වි

Page 10 of 15

04. However, the learned High Court Judge has disregarded these

contractions, stating they had not been proved by the appellant. This

finding by the learned High Court Judge is incorrect, because the

prosecution itself has admitted these contradictions in PW02’s evidence in

accordance with the provisions of Section 420 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979. This is noted in the proceedings dated

September 23, 2021.

Vide Page 170 of the Case Brief

Following, the High Court Judge’s aforementioned misdirection, the

contradictions have been subsequently addressed in a superficial manner

and have not been accorded the requisite significance.

24. In the circumstances the learned High Court Judge has failed to properly

evaluate the contractions in the evidence of PW02 in favour of the

appellant, which has led to a wrongful finding. This also indicates that the

learned High Court Judge has misdirected himself in that regard.

Page 11 of 15

25. The defence has called the appellant and two other individuals to give

evidence. In his testimony, the appellant has vehemently denied the

allegations presented. DW03, Ven. Kiribbanwewa Jinasiri Thero, has also

testified on behalf of the defence. He had been a pupil monk at the relevant

Pirivena at the same time as PW01, making them contemporaries. DW03’s

testimony corroborates the appellant’s account. Furthermore, DW03 has

revealed specific circumstances where PW01 has allegedly suggested that

they falsely implicate the appellant. According to DW03, PW01’s

motivation for this suggestion stemmed from PW01’s unhappiness and

desire to leave the Pirivena at that particular time.

W. ;d;a;d mkaif,a kej;s,d ysáhd fka' ta ysgmq yskaod thdg;a f.or

hkak ´k lsh lsh ysáhd' Bg miafia fuhdg fuydg hkak úoshla

;snqfKa keye'

m%' ldgo hkak úoshla ke;af;a @

W' wdrsh{dk yduqÿrejkag'

m%' ta fudlgo@

W' ksjdvqjg ú;rhsfk hjkafka'

m%' ksjdvqjg ú;rhs hkafka ta ke;sj hkak úoshla ;snqfKa keye'

W' Tõ'

m%' Bg miafia fudlo lf,a @

W' thd lsjqjd wmsg f.or hkak fokafka ke;s ksid f,dl=

yduqÿrefjda lror lrkjd lsh,d ta ud¾.fhka huq f.or huq

lsh,d'

m%' f,dl= yduqÿrefjda lror lrkjd lsh,d ldgo lshkak yeÿfõ @

W' wdrsh{dk yduqÿrejkaf.a ;d;a;g'

Page 12 of 15

m%' lõre lõreo lsõfõ @

W' thd ú;rhs'

m%' yduqÿrefjda lror lrkjd lsh,d ;d;a;g lshuq lsh,d ld;a tlalo

lsõfõ @

W' ;j ;=ka fofkla ysáhd uuhs iqcd; lsh, tlaflfkl=hs

iudkkaoghs ? lsõfõ' mdvï lrkfldg úNd. lghq;= ;snqKd ta

ojiaáfla' mdvï lroaos lsõfõ'

Vide Pages 263 & 264 of the Case Brief

m%' Tn jykafia lshk wdldrhg Th fya;=j ksid ;uhs wdrsh{dk

yduqÿrejkag f.or hkak jqfK a@

W' keye wr yduqÿrejkaf.ka lror fjkjd lsh,d wms;a tlal l;d

jqkd fufyu fndrejla lsh, wms f.or hd .uq lsh,d' Bg miafia

;d;a;g lsõjd' .sys,a,d ;d;a;g lõjg miafia ;uhs ;d;a;d .syska

fmd,sishg lsh,d ;snqfKa' Bg miafia ;uhs fmd,sisfhka weú,a,d

yduqÿrejkaj tlalka .sfha'

m%' f,dl= yduqÿrejkaf.ka lror fjkjd lsh,d f.or hkak W;aidy

lrmq l;dj fndrejla lsh,fk Tnjykafia lshkafka @

W' fndrejla fkfjhs we;a;la'

Vide Page 270 of the Case Brief

m%' t;fldg {dkjxY yduqÿrejkaf.ka lrorhs lsh,d wdrsh{dk

yduqÿrejkaf.a ;d;a;g lshuq lsh,d lsõfõ fldhs fj,dfjo @

W' mdvï lrk fj,dfõ'

m%' t;fldg ta we;a;lao lsõfõ @

Page 13 of 15

W' fndrejla'

m%' ljqo wi;Hhla lshkak fhdackd lf,a ljqo @

W' wdrsh{dk fmdä yduqÿrefjda ;uhs fnre lsh,d fï yduqÿrefjda

t,juq lsh,d lsõfõ '

Vide Page 274 of the Case Brief

m%' t;fldg Th idlÉpdfõoS ldrl iNdfõoS chka; iïnkaOfhka

.;a; mshjr fudllao @

W' chka;g Wjukd foalg wefrkak mkai,g tkak ;ykï lrd'

ta;a yduqÿrefjda weú,a,d yïnfjkak wefrkak mkai,g tkak

;ykï l,d'

m%' Bg miafia fudlo jqfka @

W' Bg miafia wfma wfma wÕyrejdod fmd,la ;sfhkjd fmd,g

weú,a, yduqÿrefjda tlal;a wmsg nekakd' yduqÿrejkag bkak

fokafka keye yduqÿrefjda t,jkjd lsh,d' wms weyqjd fldfyduo

t<jkafka lsh,d' n,m,a,fld t,jk yeá lsh, lsõjd'

Vide Page 280 of the Case Brief

26. In evaluating the defence evidence, the learned High Court Judge has

merely narrated the versions of the defence witnesses. The Judge has

rejected their testimony without cogent reasons, relying instead on flimsy

justifications. This assertion is supported by the following passages from

the disputed judgement;

“කෙක ේ නමුත් කෙෙ හිමිනෙ පැ. ා.01ත් ෙඟ එෙෙ ොෙරයෙ වැඩ් වා ය

ෙළ අයකු කනාකේ. ඒ අනුව කෙවැනි සිද්ධ්යක් සිදු වූවාද නැද්ධද යන්න

Page 14 of 15

ම්බන්ධකයන් ෘජු දැනීෙක් එෙ අයට ඇති බවක් කපකනන්කනට නැති අතර

එෙ අයට ෙරදරයක් කනාවුනද කවනත් අයට ෙරදර වූවාද නැද්ධද යන්න

ම්බන්ධව දැනීෙක් ඔහුට නැත. තවද එෙ අය ාක්ි කදමින් පැ. ා.01ට

නිව ට යාෙට වුවෙනාවක් තිබූ බවත්, ඒ ක ේතුව ෙත පන් කේ ක ාකු

ාමුදුරුකවෝ ෙරදර ෙරන බවට අ තයක් පැවසීෙට අකනකුත් ාමුදුරුවන්

කපාකළාඹවමින් නිව ට යාකම් වුවෙනාකවන් සිට ඇති බවට කපන්වා දීෙට

උත් ා ෙළත් පැ. ා.01 සිවුරු ැර දො නිව ට යාකම් වුවෙනාවක් තිබී ඇති

බවක් ත වුරු නැත.”

Vide Page 318 & 319 of the Case Brief

27. In the case of Ariyadasa G.K.V v The Queen 68 NLR 66, T.S. Fernando J

has stated,

“If the jury believed the appellant, he was, of course, entitled to be

acquitted. He was, in our opinion, also entitled to be acquitted even if his

evidence, though not believed, was such that it caused the jury to entertain

a reasonable doubt in regard to his guilt.”

28. Further, in the case of James Silva Vs. The Republic of Sri Lanka (1980) 2

SLR 167, Rodrigo J has stated,

“A satisfactory way to arrive at a verdict of guilt or innocence is to consider

all the matters before the Court adduced whether by the prosecution or by

the defence in its totality without compartmentalising and, ask himself

whether as a prudent man, in the circumstances of the particular case, he

believes the accused guilty of the charge or not guilty.”

Page 15 of 15

29. In those circumstances I am inclined to interfere with the conviction,

disputed judgement together with the sentencing order and set aside the

same.

30. I proceed to acquit the appellant of the charge. I make no order regarding

costs.

Appeal allowed.

31. The Registrar of this Court is directed to send a copy of this judgement to

the High Court in Embilipitiya for compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal