CA/HCC/0169/20

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with Article

138 of the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

COMPLAINANT

Vs.

Court of Appeal No:

CA/HCC/0169/2020 1. Katuwatha Vithanalage Gamini Silva alias

High Court of Kalutara Sudda

Case No: HC/872/2007 2. Kurudukarage Lalitha Padmini

ACCUSED

AND BETWEEN

Kurudukarage Lalitha Padmini

2nd ACCUSED-APPELLANNT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

RESPONDENT

CA/HCC/0169/20

2

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

K. M. G. H. Kulatunga, J.

COUNSEL : Sahan Kulatunga with Thilini

Samarasekara for the Appellant.

Anoopa De Silva, DSG for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 05/02/2025

DECIDED ON : 12/03/2025

******************************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named 2nd Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) along with the 1st Accused were indicted in the High Court of

Kalutara as follows:

1. That on or about 28.11.2004 the accused named in the indictment

committed an offence punishable under Section 355 of the Penal Code

by kidnapping Kandhanamulla Kankanalage Duminda Nalin

Kulatilaka.

CA/HCC/0169/20

3

2. At the same time and place and in the course of the same transaction

the accused committed the murder of afore-named Kandhanamulla

Kankanalage Duminda Nalin Kulatilaka thereby committing an

offence punishable under Section 296 of the Penal Code.

3. At the same time and place and in the course of the same transaction

the accused committed an offence punishable under Section 383 of

the Penal Code for the robbery of the three-wheeler belonging to the

deceased Kandhanamulla Kankanalage Duminda Nalin Kulatilaka.

The trial commenced before the Judge of the High Court of Kalutara as the

Appellant and other Accused had opted for a non-jury trial. As 1st Accused

had absconded the Court evidence led under 241(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 and fixed the case in absentia of the 1st

Accused. After leading 12 witnesses the prosecution had closed the case.

When the defence was called the Appellant had made a dock statement and

had denied the charges. After considering the evidence presented by both

parties, the learned High Court Judge had convicted the 1st Accused, and the

Appellant as follows:

For the First Count: 10 years rigorous imprisonment with a

fine of Rs.10,000/-. In default of which 01-year simple

imprisonment was imposed.

For the Second Count: death sentence was imposed.

For the Third Count: 10 years rigorous imprisonment with a

fine of Rs.10.000/-. In default of which 01-year simple

imprisonment was imposed.

Further, the learned High Court Judge had issued an open warrant against

the 1st Accused.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

CA/HCC/0169/20

4

The learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

had given consent for this matter to be argued in her absence. Further, at

the time of argument the Appellant was connected via Zoom platform from

prison.

Background of the Case.

PW4, Nimal Nandana, a three-wheel driver by profession had gone on a hire

with the 1st Accused and the Appellant and after travelling to several places,

he had dropped the two of them at Matugama around 6.30 p.m. He had

further seen the 1st Accused and the Appellant getting into another three-

wheeler to proceed to Weliwelketiya.

PW6 Ravindra Kumara had also witnessed the 1st Accused and the Appellant

get into the three-wheeler of the deceased around 6.30 p.m. on the date of

the incident.

According to PW20, the investigating officer CI/Abeysinghe, he had received

a call from a person called Dharmawansa regarding a dead body lying on the

ground near the Bogaha Junction in Molkawa. He had received this

information at 9.45 a.m. on 29.11.2004 and he arrived at the place at 10.30

a.m. His initial observation revealed that the deceaseds body was lying near

the house of the 1st Accused and the garden of the house showed signs of a

struggle and the dragging of an object across it.

On 02.12.2004 PW23, IP/Samaratunga had arrested the 1st Accused and the

Appellant while they were travelling in the three-wheeler belonging to the

deceased.

PW22, SI/ Susantha had recorded the statements of the 1st Accused and

the Appellant at the Bulathsinghala Police Station. Upon the statement of

CA/HCC/0169/20

5

the 1st Accused a cup was recovered at his residence on 03.12.2004. Next, a

Catty was recovered from the same house upon the statement of the

Appellant.

PW11, JMO Sunil Kumara had held the post mortem examination of the

deceased and had noted 07 cut injuries on the deceaseds body. According

to the JMO, the death had been caused by the throat being cut. According

to the JMO, the injuries are consistent with having been caused by a heavy

sharp cutting weapon. The post mortem had not revealed the time of death.

No identification parade was held in this case.

The Appellant had filed the following grounds of appeal.

1. The learned High Court Judge has erroneously applied the last seen

theory to convict the Appellant.

2. The learned High Court Judge has erroneously applied the

Ellenborough principle to convict the Appellant.

3. The learned High Court Judge has failed to consider, that the

prosecution has not charged the Appellant with having a common

intention of being part of a conspiracy and as such each accused

person must individually commit the actus reus while possessing the

mens rea in respect of each of the offences in order to be convicted.

As the Appeal grounds 1-3 are interconnected, those grounds will be

considered together in this appeal.

To obtain a criminal conviction, the burden lies on the prosecution to

demonstrate their case, typically relying on evidence collected by law

enforcement. This evidence may encompass diverse types such as eyewitness

CA/HCC/0169/20

6

accounts, defendant confessions, mobile phone records, medical records,

and forensic findings.

It was the contention of the learned Counsel for the Appellant that the

prosecution has relied on the last seen theory to fix the Appellant to the

crime. In other words, the prosecution has relied on the evidence that the

deceased was last seen going away in the company of the appellant and 1st

Accused and his dead body was found later near the compound where the

Appellant and the 1st Accused lived. It was the argument of the learned

Counsel that in order to prove a charge against an accused person based on

the last seen theory, it is incumbent upon the prosecution to fix the exact

time of death of the deceased.

In the King Vs. Appuhamy 46 NLR 128, the Court held that:

In considering the force and effect of circumstantial evidence, in a trial

of murder, the fact that the deceased was last seen in the company of

the accused loses a considerable part of its significance if the

prosecution has failed to fix the exact time of the death of the deceased.

The deceased was last seen with the Appellant when she got into the three-

wheeler with the 1st Accused on 28.11.2004 at 6.30 p.m. at Matugama. It is

noteworthy to mention that the Appellant was carrying her infant at that

time. Subsequently the dead body of the deceased was recovered at 9.45 a.m.

on the following day. The time gap between the last seen and the recovery of

the dead body about 15 hours. There is no evidence that the Appellant went

in to the house with the 1st Accused.

The fact that the accused was last seen with the victim or at the crime scene

does not automatically imply that the accused is guilty of committing the

CA/HCC/0169/20

7

crime. There must be additional evidence that establishes a clear connection

between the accused and the crime itself.

In this case, the simple accusation that the deceased was last seen in the

company of the Appellant cannot be considered as an incriminating item of

evidence against the Appellant, as the prosecution had failed to fix the exact

time of death. Therefore, applying the last seen theory to convict the

Appellant is a clear misdirection.

Next, the learned Counsel for the Appellant complained that the learned High

Court Judge had wrongly applied the inference created by the discovery of

the Catty (a cutting instrument) based on the statement made by the

Appellant to convict her.

Section 27 of the Ordinance deals with discovery of a fact consequent to any

information received from a person accused of an offence.

Discovery of a fact is admissible under Section 27 if the following

requirements are satisfied;

1) The evidence sought to be led under Section 27 must be relevant to

the fact in issue,

2) The fact discovered ought to have been discovered consequent to

the information received from the accused,

3) At the time of making the information known he must be in the

custody of the Police Officer,

4) He must be accused of an offence,

5) Only the portion of his information which led to the discovery of the

fact can be proven

CA/HCC/0169/20

8

T. S. Fernando J, referred to the case of Kottaya v Emperor 1947 AIR PC at

Page 70 and cited the following passage;

'' In Their Lordships' view it is fallacious to treat the' fact discovered'

within the section as equivalent to the object produced; the fact

discovered embraces the place from which the object is produced and

the knowledge of the accused as to this, and the information given must

relate distinctly to this fact. Information as to past user, or the past

history, of the object produced is not related to its discovery in the setting

in which it is discovered. Information supplied by a person in custody

that ' I will produce a knife concealed in the roof of my house' does not

lead to the discovery of a knife; knives were discovered many years ago.

It leads to the discovery of the fact that a knife is concealed in the house

of the informant to his knowledge, and if the knife is proved to have been

used in the commission of the offence, the 13 45 NLR 532 14 69 NLR

353 15 1947 AIR PC fact discovered is very relevant. But if to the

statement the words be added ' with which I stabbed A ' these words

are inadmissible since they do not relate to the discovery of the knife in

the house of the informant."

It is trite law that the only inference that can be made regarding a discovery

pursuant to a statement made by an Accused is that the Accused had

knowledge of the discovered items and nothing more. In this case the only

adverse inference that is created by the portion of evidence is that the

Appellant only knew the location of the Catty allegedly used for the murder

of the deceased. As such, in this case individual liability cannot be

established against the Appellant.

CA/HCC/0169/20

9

Circumstantial evidence is generally admissible in court, but it's crucial

that the evidence is relevant to the case, has probative value and is reliable.

As this case is hanging on circumstantial evidence, the prosecution should

prove the guilt of the Appellant through circumstantial evidence which

must be conclusive in nature.

Ranjith Silva J in Karunaratne v AG (2007) CA 162/01 stated:

[The]"Ellenborough principle" would apply only where there is

'strong prima facie evidence already existing (against) the accused and

not to augment or strengthen a weak case and to convert it into a strong

prima facie case.

In Aruna Alias Podi Raja v. Attorney General (2009) CA 71/2003, at page

54 of [2011] 2 SRI L.R, Sisira de Abrew J described the Ellenborough

principle by referring to several Judicial decisions delivered on the subject:

Applying the principles laid down in the above judicial decisions, I

hold that when prosecution establishes strong incriminating evidence

against an accused in a criminal case, the accused in those

circumstances is required in law to offer an explanation of the highly

incriminating evidence established against him and failure to offer

such an explanation suggests that he has no explanation to offer.

In this case, the evidence led against the Appellant is completely inadequate

as it does not provide a strong incriminating case against her as required by

the Ellenborough principle.

CA/HCC/0169/20

10

Therefore, the grounds of appeal raised by the Appellant have due

merit.

As the prosecution had failed in its duty to prove this case beyond reasonable

doubt, I set aside the conviction and sentence imposed by the learned High

Court Judge of Kalutara dated 16/07/2020 on the Appellant. Therefore, she

is acquitted from this case.

Accordingly, the appeal is allowed.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Kalutara along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K. M. G. H. Kulatunga, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL