IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal

in terms of Section 331(1) of the

Code of Criminal Procedure Act

No. 15 of 1979 read with Article

138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka.

The Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal Case No.

CA/HCC/0063/2023 Complainant

High Court of Kandy

Case No. HC/86/2008 Vs.

Tennekoon Mudiyanselage

Karunarathne.

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Tennekoon Mudiyanselage

Karunarathne.

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent

Page 2 of 6

BEFORE : MENAKA WIJESUNDERA, J

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J

COUNSEL : Indica Mallawaratchy for the Accused-Appellant.

Jayalakshi De Silva, S.S.C. for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 14.05.2024

DECIDED ON : 19.06.2024

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J.

The accused-appellant was convicted of attempting to commit the

murder of Senadheera Pathiranage Samarathunga in terms of Section

300 of the Penal Code. The appellant was sentenced to twenty years of

rigorous imprisonment (RI). In addition, a fine of Rs. 25,000/- was

imposed carrying a default term of three months. Also, compensation

in the sum of Rupees One Million has been ordered to be paid to the

victim carrying a default term of two years R.I. and directed

Rs. 50,000/- to be deposited in terms of the Assistance to and

Protection of Victims of Crime and Witnesses Act carrying a default term

of six months imprisonment.

At the hearing of the appeal, the learned Counsel for the appellant and

the learned Senior State Counsel (SSC) for the respondent made oral

submissions. The learned Counsel for the appellant admitted that the

learned Trial Judge had rightly convicted the appellant for attempted

murder charge. However, the learned Counsel contended that the

appellant had been wrongly punished as he was given the maximum

punishment of twenty years R.I. Therefore, the learned Counsel for the

appellant stated that she canvasses only the sentence.

Page 3 of 6

The learned Counsel for the appellant contended that it is not

reasonable to impose the maximum punishment of twenty years and

one million compensation is also excessive. According to the sentencing

order, the learned Counsel pointed out that the learned Trial Judge has

considered only the factors; pregnancy of an accused, an accused being

a breast-feeding mother of an infant, and that the accused being a

woman as mitigatory factors and the other factors that could have been

considered to reduce the punishment have not been considered by the

learned Trial Judge in sentencing.

The learned SSC for the respondent contended that the learned Trial

Judge has considered the gravity and the seriousness of the offence,

pre-arrangement for the Commission of the offence, the impact of the

offence on the victim, the several injuries caused by the appellant, and

the unremorseful conduct of the accused even after stabbing and

imposed correct and suitable sentence.

It is to be stated that the learned High Court Judge allowed both parties

to make submissions before sentencing, then considered those

submissions and made the sentencing order with reasons.

According to Section 300 of the Penal Code, for the offence of Attempt

to Murder, an accused shall be punished with imprisonment of either

description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be

liable to fine; and if hurt is caused to any person by such act, the

offender shall be liable to imprisonment of either description for a term

which may extend to twenty years, and shall also be liable to fine.

For the offence of Attempt to Murder, there is no minimum mandatory

sentence. Therefore, on the circumstances of a case, even the sentence

could be suspended. However, this is certainly not a fit case to give a

suspended sentence. When an accused is sentenced, the mitigating

factors and the aggravating factors must be considered.

Page 4 of 6

However, as pointed out by the learned Counsel for the appellant, there

were mitigating factors to be considered in sentencing other than the

aforesaid factors stated in the learned Judges sentencing order.

The number of injuries inflicted to the victim and the impact on the

victim including physical and psychological trauma are aggravating

factors in this case. The appellant has inflicted two stab injuries and

there are eight cut injuries. Injury No. 2 explained in the Medico-Legal

Report marked P-1 is an injury sufficient in the ordinary course of

nature to cause death. Therefore, the appellant had caused serious

injuries to PW-1. Remorse shown by an appellant is a mitigating factor.

However, in this case, the appellant was not remorseful even after he

caused injuries to the victim. The appellant stabbed repeatedly to PW-

1 and after he fell on the ground also, he stabbed according to PW-

1s evidence. When PW-1 was fallen on the ground after stabbing, he

requested the persons in the vehicles traveling on the road to inform

his office about this incident, even at that time, the appellant had

threatened them with a knife in his hand, not to take the injured victim

anywhere. These items of evidence demonstrate appellants fierce

nature in committing the crime.

However, mitigating factors such as the period that he faced the trial,

the time gap between the date of committing the offence and conviction,

age of the accused must also be considered in sentencing an accused.

It was held in Priyanka Perera V. Attorney General S.C. Appeal

99/2006 that the charge has been hanging over the appellants head

over a period of eight years and the disorganization that essentially

would have followed due to the undue delay in confirmation of his

sentence, in my view are circumstances, although not obligatory, that

should be taken into consideration in suspending the sentence of

imprisonment.

Page 5 of 6

In the case at hand, the offence was committed on 7th of September

2004. The Judgment was delivered and the appellant was convicted on

22nd of June 2022 after 18 years. On the date of the conviction, the

appellant was 62 years according to the submissions made by the

appellants Counsel. That means he committed the offence at the age of

44 years and went to jail for the offence that he had committed at the

age of 62 years. According to the sentence passed by the learned Judge,

he will have to be imprisoned until he reaches the age of 82 years. The

learned Trial Judge could have considered these matters in sentencing.

In addition, imposing the maximum punishment of 20 years is also not

justifiable. The appellant has one previous conviction in 1994 according

to the certificate of previous convictions. For the said conviction, one-

year imprisonment had been suspended for five years. By the 18th of

January 1999, the operational period of the said suspended sentence

was over. The offence relating to this case has been committed five years

after the operational period of the said suspended sentence. Other than

that, the appellant has no previous convictions. Therefore, imposing the

maximum punishment is not reasonable.

Considering the facts; the age of the accused-appellant, having only one

previous conviction long ago, facing the trial and continuously

appearing in Court from 2008 to 2022 and the fact that he was

convicted 18 years after committing the offence with the aforesaid

aggravating factors, I am of the view that it is proper to reduce the

period of imprisonment from twenty years R.I. to fourteen years R.I.

Therefore, twenty years R.I. is reduced to fourteen years R.I. to be

operative from 22nd of June 2022, the date of conviction. The

compensation to be paid to PW-1 by the appellant is reduced from

Rs. 1,000,000/- to Rs. 500,000/-. The default term of imprisonment for

the fine, the sum ordered to be deposited in terms of the Assistance to

and Protection of Victims of Crime and Witnesses Act, and the default

sentence should stand as it is.

Page 6 of 6

Subject to the above variation of the sentence, the appeal is dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Menaka Wijesundera, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL