Page 1 of 15

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of

section 331 (1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No- 15 of 1979, read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

CA/HCC/0254/16 COMPLAINANT

Vs.

High Court of Kuliyapitiya Loku Arumage Nimal Jayasinghe

Case No: HC/132/2011 ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

Loku Arumage Nimal Jayasinghe

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12

RESPONDENT

Page 2 of 15

Before : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

: P. Kumararatnam, J.

Counsel : J. P. Gamage with Dulshika Wijerathna and

Chamara Fernando for the Accused Appellant

: Anoopa De Silva, DSG for the Respondent

Argued on : 31-01-2023

Written Submissions : 25-07-2018 (By the Accused Appellant)

: 05-11-2018 (By the Respondent)

Decided on : 16-03-2023

Sampath B Abayakoon, J.

This is an appeal by the accused appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

appellant) on being aggrieved of his conviction and the sentence by the learned

High Court Judge of Kuliyapitiya.

The appellant was indicted before the High Court of Kuliyapitiya on two counts.

In count 01, he was charged for having in his possession a gun, that is to say a

repeater shot gun (, ) on or about 6th September 2007

at Dambadeniya, without a valid permit and thereby committing an offence

punishable in terms of section 22 (3) read with section 22 (1) of the Firearms

Ordinance No. 33 of 1916 as amended by Firearms Amendment Act No. 22 of

1996.

The 2nd charge preferred against him was that at the same time and at the same

transaction, having in his possession 60 live cartridges without a valid permit,

and thereby committing an offence punishable in terms of section 27 of the

Explosives Act No. 21 of 1956 as amended by Amendment Act No. 33 of 1969.

Page 3 of 15

After trial, the learned High Court Judge of Kuliyapitiya of his judgement dated

30th November 2016, found the appellant guilty as charged on the basis that the

charges proved that he had in his possession a gun and 60 live cartridges.

Accordingly, he was sentenced to 4 years rigorous imprisonment on count 1 and

ordered to pay a fine of Rs. 10000/-. In default of paying the fine, he was

sentenced to 01-year rigorous imprisonment.

On count 2, he was sentenced to 01-year rigorous imprisonment and to a fine of

Rs. 2000/-. In default of paying the fine, he was sentenced to 6 months rigorous

imprisonment.

It has been ordered that the default sentences should commence at the

conclusion of the rigorous imprisonment sentences ordered in relation to the two

counts.

Since it has not been ordered that the sentences should be concurrent to each

other, it has to be taken as that the total imprisonment period for both the counts

should be 5 years rigorous imprisonment.

The Facts in Brief

PW-01 was serving in the Peliyagoda Police Crime Investigation Division at the

time relevant to this incident. On 6th September 2007, one of his subordinate

officers PS-48856 Chandana has received an information of a person who is

possessing a T-56 weapon and ammunition, as well as two magazines.

Accordingly, since his unit had the jurisdiction to investigate information of this

nature throughout the island, PW-01 has organized a raid. After informing his

superior officers, he has left the police station with seven other officers, including

police sergeant (PS) Chandana, and had reached Giriulla area where PS

Chandana had met the informant. The informant has pointed out the house of

the suspect and has left. The police party has surrounded the house of the

suspect around 10.50 pm, and PW-01 has called for the suspect by his name.

Page 4 of 15

The suspect Nimal has opened the door querying who is calling at this time of

the night.

According to the evidence of PW-01, when he saw the police party, he appeared

to be panicked. Apart from the suspect, he has seen two females and two small

male children in the house. It was his evidence that he questioned the suspect

and recorded a short statement from him, and based on the information

received, he recovered a T-56 weapon under a bed in the house. When recovered,

it was in a yellow-coloured gunny bag. Apart from the T-56 weapon, he has

recovered 60 live cartridges and 2 magazines.

The witness has properly identified the items recovered by him before the trial

Court, and had marked the weapon as P-01, the 2 magazines as P-02 and the

live cartridges as P-03. The witness has identified the appellant as the person

whom he arrested for having in his possession, the said productions without a

valid permit.

On a subsequent date, the witness has marked the extract of the statement made

by the appellant in terms of section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance, which led to

the discovery of the productions marked as P-01, P-02 and P-03.

It needs to be noted that when cross-examining PW-01, the position taken up by

the Counsel for the appellant had not been that the productions were not

recovered from his possession, but the recovered productions were owned by a

person called Bandu.

It had been the evidence of PW-01 that although they looked for a person called

Bandu, no such person was found, and it was from the possession of the

appellant, the weapon and the ammunition were recovered, based on his

statement to the police in terms of section 27 (1) of the Evidence Ordinance.

PW-02 called by the prosecution to prove the charges against the appellant has

been PS-48856 Chandana, who was the officer who received the information

from one of his private informants that led to the raid. He has corroborated the

Page 5 of 15

evidence of PW-01, and has stated in his evidence that when they entered the

house, there was a middle-aged male and a female, as well as a boy of about 6

years of age.

It was his evidence that after the statement of the appellant was recorded, the

weapon and the other items of evidence were recovered while hidden under a bed

in a room. According to him, when PW-01 lifted the mattress of the bed, the

yellow coloured polysack gunny bag was visible on the floor and the marked

productions were found inside that bag. He too has identified the appellant as

the person from whom the productions were recovered.

In this action, the prosecution has called witnesses to establish the chain of

custody of the productions from the point of recovery up to it being taken to the

Government Analyst and taken back to the Court. PW-05, PC-32693 Aruna

Kumara was one of the officers who took part in the raid which led to the

discovery of the productions and also one of the officers who had the custody of

productions before it was taken to the Government Analyst. In his evidence, he

has stated that when the appellant pointed out the productions to PW-01, the

productions were under a mattress of a bed that was found inside a room.

PW-09, the Government Analyst has given evidence in this action and has

marked his report as P-07. It has opined that the production marked and sent

to him as P-01 was an automatic gun and has stated that it falls within the

interpretation of a gun in terms of section 2 (a) of the Firearms Ordinance.

At the closure of the prosecution case and when the appellant was called up for

a defence, he has made a statement from the dock. He has claimed that he was

not arrested on the day as claimed by prosecution witnesses, but six days before,

and was kept at the police station and harassed. He has also claimed that PW-

01 never came to his house, but it was PS Chandana and a team of police officers

who came around 1.00 am along with his own brother and arrested him. He has

stated that the police could not find any weapon in his house and as pointed out

by his brother, a weapon was recovered in an abandoned house nearby, and

Page 6 of 15

police went after a person called Bandu, also as informed by his brother. The

appellant has claimed that he was produced before the Magistrate Court as the

police could not find the said person named Bandu.

It had been his position that due to the enmity he had with his brother, he was

falsely implicated by him, and he is innocent of the charges.

The Grounds Of Appeal

At the hearing of this appeal, the learned Counsel for the appellant urged the

following grounds of appeal for the consideration of the Court.

1. The prosecution failed to establish exclusive possession against the

appellant.

2. The learned High Court Judge has failed to evaluate the evidence placed

before the Court and has failed to consider the contradictions inter se

and per se between the evidence of PW-01, PW-02 and that of PW-05.

3. The admissibility of the recovery allegedly made in terms of section 27

(1) of the Evidence Ordinance was not according to law.

4. The learned High Court Judge has failed to properly consider and

evaluate the dock statement made by the appellant.

At the outset of his submissions, the learned Counsel for the appellant informed

the Court that he will not be challenging the times mentioned by witnesses with

regard to the arrest and other related matters.

It was his position that the prosecution has failed to prove the exclusive

possession of the gun and the ammunition. He referred to the evidence of the

witnesses to argue that they are contradictory to each other in relation to the

occupants of the house when this raid took place.

It was his position that although PW-01 has stated that only the appellant and

two females and two minor children were at the house, PW-02 has stated that

there was another male person in the house. Accordingly, it was his position that

the prosecution has failed to prove the exclusive possession since the

Page 7 of 15

productions have been allegedly recovered under a bed in one of the rooms of

the house.

The learned Counsel cited several judgements pronounced by our superior

courts to substantiate his argument in this regard. The learned Counsel cited

several pieces of evidence where it was contended that the evidence of the key

witnesses is contradictory to each other inter se and per se, to argue that

depending on such evidence was unsafe for a conviction in a criminal case.

Making submissions in relation to the alleged section 27 (1) recovery, it was his

position that when the police party entered the house, it was within their

knowledge about the productions that had been allegedly recovered later. It was

his position that under the circumstances, a section 27 (1) statement has no

value.

It was his contention that the learned High Court Judge has failed to properly

evaluate the dock statement made by the appellant and, especially, his stand

that nothing was recovered from his possession. It was his contention that the

appeal should succeed for the reasons advanced by him.

It was the submission of the learned Deputy Solicitor General (DSG) that this is

a matter where the productions have been recovered in consequent to a

statement made by the appellant in terms of section 27 (1) of the Evidence

Ordinance and hence, the principle of exclusive possession would not arise.

It was her stand that at the trial, the appellant has never denied the recovery of

the productions, but only has claimed that it belonged to somebody else. It was

her position that the appellant has failed to confront the witnesses with his stand

taken up when he made his dock statement, and was of the view that the learned

High Court Judge has correctly considered his dock statement as well as the

stand taken at the trial in its correct perspective.

The learned DSG submitted that the alleged contradictions cannot be considered

as contradictions which go into the root of the matter or create any doubt as to

Page 8 of 15

the evidence of the prosecution. It was her position that the grounds of appeal

urged have no merit and the appeal should be dismissed.

Consideration of the Grounds of Appeal

As the first three grounds of appeal are interrelated, I will now proceed to

consider the said grounds of appeal together.

As argued correctly by the learned Counsel for the appellant, there cannot be

any dispute that possession in a criminal case must be actual and exclusive to

impose criminal liability on an accused person.

In the cited case of Banda Vs. Haramanis 21 NLR 141, it was held:

Possession to be criminal must be actual and excusive for criminal liability

and it does not attach to constructive possession where property is found in

a house in the possession of more than one inmate more of them could be

said to be in possession of it for the purpose of this offence unless there is

evidence of exclusive conscious control against them.

In the cited case of Muththaiyah Sriyalatha Saraswathi Vs. The Attorney

General CA No. 212/95 decided on 30-06-1999, it was stated by F. N. D.

Jayasuriya, J. :

There is some rather incoherent and unimpressive evidence led in regard

to the issue as to who was the owner of the said premisesWhen this

evidence is evaluated, analyzed and weighed; his evidence is not cogent

and impressive enough for the Court to hold that the accused is the chief

householder and the owner of the premises. The criminal liability attached

only to possession on which is proved to be actual, exclusive and conscious

possession on the part of a person.

In his submission before this Court, one of the main grounds urged by the

learned Counsel for the appellant to argue that the prosecution has failed to

prove who had the actual possession of the gun and the ammunition found was

Page 9 of 15

the alleged contradictory evidence as to who were the occupants of the house. It

was his position that although PW-01 had stated that the only male present in

the house was the appellant, according to the evidence of PW-02, there had been

another male person when they entered the house.

I would now reproduce the relevant portions of the evidence for better

understanding of the judgement.

PW-01 states at page 69 of the appeal brief,

: ?

: .

: ?

:

.

: ?

: . .

. .

: ?

: .

. . .

In relation to the above evidence, PW-02 in his evidence has stated as follows,

: ?

: .

.

: .

Page 10 of 15

: .

Although the learned Counsel contends that the evidence of PW-02 shows that

there was another person in the house, I have no reason to agree with such a

contention. If one reads the evidence without compartmentalizing it, it becomes

very much clear that both the witnesses are referring to the appellant as the only

male occupant of the house. When PW-02 says that when he entered the house,

there was a middle-aged man, a female and a small child, he is not referring to

a third person, but to the appellant, as the person whom they encountered.

It is well settled law that when evaluating evidence, it must be done by

considering the evidence as a whole and by not compartmentalizing it. In the

cited case of Saraswathi Vs. The Attorney General (supra), the Court of Appeal

had considered the evidence and come to a finding that the evidence adduced in

that case was not cogent enough as to who the main householder and the owner

of the premises. Although the ownership of the house may have been relevant

when it comes to the facts considered in that case, I am of the view that proving

the ownership of a house where an alleged raid takes place is always not

necessary to prove exclusive possession as it is a matter depending on the facts

and circumstances unique to each case.

In the case of Alagaratnam and Others Vs. The Republic of Sri Lanka (1986)

1v1 SLR 237, the Court observed that the question of possession must be

determined on the facts and the circumstances of each case.

In the matter under consideration, the information received had been that the

appellant is in possession of a weapon in his home. When the raiding party

approached the house, it has been in the middle of the night and there was no

evidence to suggest that there were any outsiders, other than the occupants of

the house, were in the house. According to PW-01s evidence, when he knocked

at the door and called the name of the appellant, it is he who has opened the

door blaming why he is being disturbed at that time of the day. There had been

only female occupants and children in the house.

Page 11 of 15

Therefore, there cannot be any doubt that the appellant was the main occupant

of the household and who had the control of it.

It is the evidence of both the main witnesses that the weapon, ammunition and

the magazines were found after PW-01 recorded a short statement from the

appellant. The prosecution has marked the relevant portion of the statement

which led to the discovery of the productions in terms of section 27 (1) of the

Evidence Ordinance.

E. R. S. R. Coomaraswamy in his book The Law of Evidence Volume 1 at page

442, refers to the limitations and essentials of the admissibility of a section 27

statement in the following manner.

The language of section 27 shows that the legislature has prescribed

certain limitations in order to define the scope of the information provable

against the accused. Viewed from another aspect, this means that the

section requires the following essentials.

a) The information must have been received from a person accused of an

offence, that is, the accused.

b) A fact must be deposed to as having been discovered in consequence of

such information; that is, the information must be the cause of the

discovery.

c) The accused must have been in the custody of a police officer at the

time of the statement.

d) If these facts concur, so much of such information, whether it amounts

to a confession or not, as relates distinctly to the fact thereby discovered

may be proved.

Citing several decided cases where it has been stated, if a fact was already known

to the police, a recovery based on such knowledge cannot be attributed to a

section 27 statement of an accused, Coomaraswamy at page 442 and 443 states,

Page 12 of 15

A fact cannot be said to have been discovered in consequence of

information received from the accused, if it is already known to the police

from another source. A fact already known to the police cannot be

rediscovered on the statement of an accused person. If the fact was known

to other police officers, but not to the particular officer who deposes to it,

there would be no discovery and the section would be inapplicable.(Aher

Raja Khima Vs. State of Saurashtra A.I.R. (1956) S.C. 217, Naresh

Chandra Das Vs. Emperor A.I.R. (1942) Cal. 593, Adu Shikdar Vs.

Emperor (1885) 11 Cal. 835).

It is clear from the evidence that other than of an information that the appellant

is in possession of a weapon, police have had no knowledge as to the exact place

where it would be, when PW-01 has recorded his statement. I am of the view that

fact was not within the knowledge of the police when the discovery of the

weapons and the ammunition was made upon relying on the section 27

statement. Therefore, I find no reasons to agree with the contentions that the

section 27 recovery would not be applicable as evidence against the appellant.

The question whether it can be determined that it was the appellant who had the

exclusive possession of the discovered productions are concerned, it was the

evidence of the witnesses that the relevant productions were discovered as

pointed out by the appellant from under a bed in a room of the house. Although

such a discovery could have been made even without a statement in that regard

by the accused, if the police team searched the house, in this instant, I find no

basis to doubt that the discovery was made as a result of the section 27

statement. The items of productions discovered had been a T-56 weapon, 60

rounds of ammunition and 2 magazines concealed in a polythene gunny bag kept

under a bed. I am of the view that evidence led in this action cannot attribute

the possession of such weapons and ammunition to the females of the house

and minor children under any circumstances.

Page 13 of 15

Besides all that, when the relevant witnesses gave evidence in Court, the line of

cross-examination by the learned Counsel who represented the appellant had

not been on the basis of a denial that the productions were not found in the

possession of the appellant.

The only position taken had been to imply that the gun found belongs to another

person called Bandu and nothing else.

I am in no position to agree with the contention that there are serious infirmities

inter se and per se between evidence of PW-01, 02 as well as PW-05.

I have already discussed that the evidence of both PW-1 and 02 relates to only

one male in the house when the raid was conducted. If one reads the evidence

of PW-01 and 02 as a whole, it becomes clear that the informant has gone near

the house of the appellant only for the purpose of showing the PW-01 the correct

house. It is clear from the evidence of PW-01, what he had been saying was that

the informant did not take part in the raid itself, but left after showing the house.

What PW-02 says in that regard is also similar to the stand of PW-01.

In his evidence, PW-01 has stated that after the arrest, there was no revelation

about another person, but later in his evidence, he has admitted that they went

looking for a third person. In fact, what PW-02 says is also the same thing. In

their evidence, PW-01 and 02 had clearly stated that the recovery of the gun and

the ammunitions was by PW-01 as pointed out by the appellant. Both of them

say that PW-01 went into the room and removed the mattress that was on the

bed and they were able to witness a yellow-coloured gunny bag on the floor under

the bed, through the gaps in the wooden poles of the bed, and later the

productions were recovered inside the bag. What Pw-05 says is also that PW-01

removed the mattress and recovered a gunny bag, although he doesnt say that

the gunny bag was on the floor under the bed.

Page 14 of 15

I am of the view for contradictions and infirmities to be considered as material

in a criminal trial, such contradictions and infirmities must go into the core of

the matter. Such infirmities which are trivial in nature, that do not create any

doubt or doubts in the prosecution case cannot be considered to conclude that

the prosecution has failed to prove its case.

For the reasons stated as above, I find no merit in the first three grounds of

appeal urged.

The fourth ground of appeal is that the learned High Court Judge failed to

consider and evaluate the dock statement made by the appellant.

I find no reason to subscribe to such an argument in this appeal. The learned

High Court Judge has clearly summarized what the appellant has stated in his

dock statement and has considered whether it has created a reasonable doubt

as to the prosecution case, or at least had provided a reasonable explanation as

to the evidence placed before the Court.

The learned High Court Judge has been very much mindful that although a dock

statement is not evidence that can be valued similar to that of evidence given

under oath, and subjected to the test of cross-examination, such evidence also

has evidential value. It is clear from the judgement, that the learned High Court

Judge has considered the dock statement, the value that can be attached to such

a statement.

In his dock statement, the appellant has stated that when he was arrested, the

police officers came into the house with his own brother who had a previous

grudge against him and it was at his instigation that he was taken away from

the house. It had been his position that it was his brother who showed a gunny

bag near an abandoned house, and the police party went looking for a person

called Bandu as informed by his brother and since the mentioned Bandu could

not be located, he was produced in Court after six days.

Page 15 of 15

I find that none of these positions have been put to the relevant witnesses when

they gave evidence and confronted them, if that was the stand of the appellant.

On the contrary, the line taken up by the defence had been not of a denial but a

statement saying that these things belong to one Bandu, which in other words,

implying that the things were recovered as the witnesses say, but they were not

belonging to the appellant.

I am of the view that since the learned High Court Judge has correctly analyzed

the defence and the dock statement of the appellant, there exists no basis for the

4th ground of appeal either.

The appeal of the appellant is dismissed as it is devoid of any merit.

The conviction and the sentence affirmed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal