f

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for a

mandate in the nature of Writs of Certiorari

and Writ of Mandamus in terms of Article

140 of the Constitution.

A.N.M. Abee Kuhafa

No. 13/4, Ambagastenna, Wellambada

Presently at No. 2/B, Elanda Watta,

Ulahittuwala

Malwana.

Petitioner.

CA. Writ Application No. 77/08 Vs.

CA. 78/08, CA 79/08 &

CA. 80/08

1. The Director General of Customs

Times building

Bristol Street

Colombo-Ol.

BEFORE:

2

2. The Assistant Director of customs

Revenue Task Force (RTF)

Times building

Bristol Street

Colombo-Ol.

3. The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12.

Respondents.

Hon. Sathya Hettige P.C J. President of the Court of Appeal

Hon. D.S.C Lecamwasam J, Judge of the Court of Appeal

COUNSEL: Nizam Kariappar with M. I.M Iyanullah

For the petitioners

Arjuna Obeysekere SSC for respondents.

ARGUED ON: 22/07/2010 and 08/11/2010,

Written Submissions tendered on 06/09/2010

DECIDED ON: 10/02/2011

3

SATHYA HETTIGE P.C. J. (PICA)

When the above applications were taken up for argument both the Counsel

agreed that all the applications be consolidated and taken up for hearing

together and application no. 77/2008 be taken up for hearing as the test

case and the decision in CA 77/2008 will be applicable to all other 3

applications and will be binding on all parties in CA 78/08, CA 79/08, and CA

80/08.

The petitioner in this application is seeking

a) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the decision of the 1st and or the 2nd

respondents to confiscate the goods referred to in the Bill of Lading

and the decision to auction the items referred to in the document

marked P 7

b) A Writ of Mandamus direct 1st and or 2nd respondents to release the

goods

When this matter was for hearing learned counsel for the petitioner,

however, informed court that he would be confining himself to the

relief seeking a Writ of Certiorari only as the goods have been

already sold by the respondents.

The petitioner states that he imported a wooden box containing 920

Kilograms of Cardamom by sea cargo in August 2007 along with a

washing machine and complains that he did not get communication of

the arrival of the consignment regarding which he called over at

bonded warehouse of Trico International Colombo on 28th of

November 2007. The petitioner was informed that the Customs

opened the Cargo and had been detained at the said bonded

warehouse.

4

It is further stated that the petitioner was informed by the Customs

to obtain a Certificate of Fumigation from the Department of

Agriculture and while the petitioner was taking steps to get the

quantity of cardamom fumigated, the petitioner requested the 1st

and 2nd respondents in writing to release the documents pertaining

to the Cargo detained by the Customs. The petitioner complains that

he became aware that the goods had been confiscated and were to

be auctioned.

The petitioner's case is based on two grounds

a) The respondents action to confiscate the cargo and auction the

goods is illegal since the goods were not liable to be confiscated

b) The decision to confiscate was made by the respondents in

violation of principles of natural justice in that the petitioner was

neither informed of the decision nor was he given a hearing

before the decision was made.

It should be stated that the goods imported by the petitioner

were listed in the cargo manifest as (unaccompanied passenger

baggage" and categorized as personal baggage, on examination by

the Sri Lanka Customs it was found that the cargo boxes contained

large quantity of cardamom among other goods.

It transpired in the course of hearing of this matter that upon

examination of the

Goods imported by the petitioner on 19/10/2007 in the presence

of M/s Trico Maritime (Pvt) Limited, the following items of goods

were found,

a) 1215 kgs. of cardamom

b) One unit of washing machine

c) Three pairs of ladies shoes, two pairs of men's shoes one pair of

ladies' half shoes two pairs of gents' slippers'

1 \ ;

5

d) Twenty two ventilating fans- KDK brand

e) Thirty emergency lamps.

It was argued by the respondents that the import of cardamom

in commercial quantities is subject to prior approval being granted

under the provIsions of Gazette notification No. 165/2 dated

02/11/1981 which is marked R 5 issued by the Department of

Agriculture.

It was contended by the learned Senior State Counsel that the

petitioner has failed to obtain the permission from the

Department of Import and Export when importing goods in

commercial quantities and thereby violated the provisions of Import

and Export Control Act and the Exchange Control Act .The goods

were imported by the petitioner in violation of the provisions

contained in section 107 A of the Customs Ordinance and in fact

the petitioner could not have imported the goods into the

country as unaccompanied passenger baggage under the Regulations

made under section 107 A of the Customs Ordinance marked R4.

Section 107 A of the Customs Ordinance reads as follows:

"Any passenger arriving in Sri Lanka may be searched and his baggage landed, examined and delivered by such of/icers and in accordance with such regulations as the Minister may prescribe by Notification published in the Gazette; and if any prohibited, restricted or uncustomed goods are found concealed in the baggage of any passenger arriving in Sri Lanka... the same shall be forfeited together with the contents of the packages .. "

On a perusal of the Regulations (R4) made under section 107 A of

the above provisions personal baggage of a passenger who is

6

ordinarily resident in Sri Lanka is exempt from Customs duty

provided

a) such goods are bona fide are for personal use and

b) The goods in respect of a single item, are not in a

commercial quantity as determined by the Director General of

Customs.

It should be noted that the goods imported by the petitioner are

declared to be forfeited by operation of law in terms of the

provisions contained in section 107 A of the Customs Ordinance

and if the goods are imported in violation of the above provisions

the law provides that the goods declared to be forfeited be

seized by the Customs Officers.

It is obviously clear that section 107 A of the Ordinance provides

that flany prohibited, restricted and or uncustomed goods found

concealed in the baggage of any passenger arriving in Sri Lanka

such goods shall be forfeited. The petitioner in this application

failed to adduce any evidence to establish that he obtained

prior approval from the authorities to bring such large quantity of

cardamom into the country.

However, It can be seen that the petitioner's complaint is that

respondents failed to give the petitioner a hearing before the

goods were seized and prior to the forfeiture of goods in violation

of principles of natural Justice. It was argued by the respondents

that since the goods are forfeited by operation of law there is

no requirement to give a hearing in terms of the law.

Mr Obeysekere submitted that, despite the fact that there is no

legal requirement to give a hearing in terms of the law, the

respondents informed the petitioner to call over and collect the

7

goods by the letter dated 07/09/2007 marked R 2 (a) and however,

the said letter was returned since the address given by the

petitioner was a bogus and fictitious address and there was no such

person by the name of the petitioner resident in that area.

Learned Senior State Counsel drew the attention of court to the

reported case of Palasamy Nadar v Lnktree 51 NLR 524 wherein

Greatian J held

It I agree with the learned Solicitor General that the Customs Ordinance nowhere requires the authorities to notify the owner of the fact that his goods have been seized or of the grounds seizure.( some such provision is made, I find, in the Customs Consolidation Act of England -39 and 40 Vic. C. section 207) Be that as it may it stands to reason any communication which is in fact made to the owner should be unambiguous should leave no room for misunderstanding on the point."

It also transpired in the course of hearing that the petitioner failed to

inform the shipping agent of any change of address of the petitioner

or any change of details to the cargo manifest and the respondents

had no correct address to correspond. It is seriously noted by court

that as to why the petitioner failed to provide the correct address of

the petitioner to correspond with if the petitioner genuinely

imported the goods in question according to law.

I agree with the submissions of Mr. Obeysekere SSC that the

petitioner has failed to obtain the prior approval and comply with

the provisions of the Customs Ordinance as amended before

importation of goods in question and the respondents have given

adequate hearing to the petitioner before forfeiture of goods.

8

It is pertinent to note that importation of goods in commercial

quantities which are prohibited under the Customs Ordinance without

prior approval and the declaration of the said goods as personal

items is a serious matter that this court has to consider. The

petitioner's dishonest intent in doing so does not warrant and entitle

the petitioner to the grant of a discretionary remedy.

It has been decided In several judgments of this court that the grant

of Writs of Certiorari and Mandamus are discretionary remedies.

In P.S Bus Company v. Ceylon Transport Board 61 NLR 491 the court

held that,

II A prerogative Writ is not issued as a matter of course and it is in the discretion of court to refuse to grant it if the facts and circumstances are such as to warrant a refusal. A writ ,for instance, will not issue where it would be vexatious and futile."

In the case of Bisomenika VCR de Alwis the court observed and

said that II a Writ of Certiorari is issued at the discretion of court. It cannot be held to be Writ of right or issued as a matter of course ... "

I have carefully considered the material in this case and I hold that

the respondents have acted within their powers under the Customs

Ordinance.

9

In the circumstances of this case and having considered the oral and

written submissions of both counsel I am of the view that the

petitioner is not entitled to the relief sought and the petitioner's

application should be refused.

Accordingly, I refuse and dismiss this application and CA No. 78/08, CA

79/08 and CA 80/08 without costs.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D,S.C. Lecamwasam,

I agree.

JUDGE