IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

C.A.(Writ)Application No. 374/2015

In the matter of an Application under and in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution for mandates in the nature of Writs of Certiorari Prohibition and Mandamus.

Moramudali Arachchilage Gayani Polgampalage (nee Piyadasa), No.31, Kavinda Place, Kirulapone, Colombo 06, and presently residing at No.87, Lagoon Crescent, Bellbowrie, Queensland 4070, Australia. Appearing by her lawfully appointed Attorney, Moramudali Arachchilage Piyadasa of 'Gayani', Dolahena, Kalawana.

Petitioner Vs.

01. W.M.M.B. Weerasekara, Commissioner General of Agrarian Development, Department of Agrarian Development, No.42, Sir Marcus Fernando Mawatha, Colombo 07.

1

02. J.D.N.s. Jayakody, Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Development, Department of Agrarian Development, Development District Office, Ratnapura New Town, Ratnapura.

03. B.V. Janaka Indrajith Kumarasiri, Agrarian Development Officer, Agrarian Services Centre, Kalawana.

04. N.Karunaratne, (Deceased) Hangarangala, Kalawana. Respondents

04A. Polwatta Gallage Chandrika Hemanthi Hangarangala, Kalawana.

04B. Rasika Sanjeewani Karunarane, Hangarangala, Kalawana.

04C. Nilusiya Damayanthi Karunaratne, Hangarangala, Kalawana.

Substituted-Respondents.

2

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECICEDON

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

Lasitha Kanuwanaarachchi with Michale

Jaasinghe for the Petitioner.

H.Withanachchi with Shantha

Karunadhara for the 4th Respondent

Chaya Sri Nammuni S.s.c. for the 1st 2nd

and 3rd Respondents.

2B.11.2019& 10.02.2020

3009.2020

*************

ACHALA WENGAPPULI. J.

The Petitioner, in this application filed through her lawfully

appointed Attorney, had invoked the jurisdiction conferred on this Court

by Article 140 of the Constitution seeking issuance of Writs of Certiorari,

Prohibition and Mandamus challenging certain decisions and orders made

by the 1st to 3rd Respondents, acting under the provisions of Agrarian

Services Act No. 59 of 1979 and Agrarian Development Act No. 46 of 2000,

in respect of a paddy land known as Mahamerige Watta Meda Kella

Kumbura, of which she owns and possesses a 2- acre plot, upon her Ij14th

share entitlement.

In seeking a Writ of Certiorari, the Petitioner intends to quash several

decisions made by the 1st and 2nd Respondents, marked as PB, PI4(a),

PI4(b), P21, P27, P2B(a), and P2B(b), by which the said Respondents have

recognised the 4th Respondent as the landlord of the said 2-acre portion of

3

paddy land and one Mendis Singho and upon his death his wife w.P.

Ranmenike as its Tenant Cultivator.

The Writ of Prohibition was sought by the Petitioner, in order to

restrain the said Respondents from implementation of any order or

judgment of "any Magistrate's Court pertaining to the handing over" of the

said undivided plot of paddy land andj or "ejection/eviction of the said W.P.

Ranmenike therefrom" until the final determination of the partition action

pending before the District Court of Ratnapura in case No. 115jP. She also

seeks a Writ of Prohibition preventing making any further orders

pertaining to the ownership or arrears payment of ground share in respect

of the said undivided share of paddy land, until the final determination of

the said partition action, in addition to seeking the prevention of

implementing the order P8 against her and her immediate predecessor.

The Writ of Mandamus was sought by the Petitioner to compel the 1st

and 2nd Respondents to discontinue any further legal proceedings

instituted in the Magistrate's Court under Section 8 of the Agrarian

Development Act No. 56 of 2000, and to withdraw such proceedings and

also from taking any action to hand over possession of the said land to the

4th Respondent.

The 1st to 3rd Respondents and the 4th Respondent have in their

respective statement of objections resisted the application of the Petitioner.

Describing the factual basis on which the Petitioner has sought the

above reliefs, it is stated that her father had acquired 1j14th share of the

paddy land called Mahamerige Watta Meda Kella Kumbura upon a deed of

transfer No. 15827 of 14.03.1990 from one Yasawardhane Bandara, before

4

making a gift in her favour on 09.11.2007 by deed of gift No. 979. She also

states that the 4th Respondent too had acquired a 1/14th share of the said

paddy land. In relation to the paddy land called Mahamerige Watta Meda

Kella Kumbura, survey plan No. 1406 (P2(b))was prepared upon institution

of the partition action No. 115/P in 1972. The said preliminary plan

indicates that the total extent of the said paddy land is over 29 acres,

inclusive of 20 lots, as shown by the parties to the said action.

It is stated that when the Petitioner's father had acquired rights over

the said undivided 1/14th share over a 2-acre portion of land from lot No.

19, one Y. A. Mendis Singho was already recognised as its tenant cultivator,

who continued to function as the registered tenant cultivator under him,

until the said cultivator's death in December 2000. Since the surviving

members of the said tenant cultivator's family did not wish to continue as

the tenant cultivators, it is claimed by the Petitioner that her father, either

by himself or through his servants, had cultivated and possessed the 2-acre

paddy land from year 2000.

The rights over the other 1/14th share of the said portion of paddy

land, which had devolved from one H. A. Surabiel Appuhamy, is claimed

several other parties but the Petitioner was emphatic that her father had

continued to possess" a clearly identified/demarcated 02 Acre extent of said

land" as after death of Y. A. Mendis Singho, and no person was appointed

as his successor in relation to the said portion.

The Petitioner claims that the 4th Respondent "is also claiming

awnership to the said same 2 Acre extent of undivided land" that her father had

cultivated after his acquisition of 1/14th undivided share. In the said

5

partition action, her father is named as the 54th Defendant, while the 4th

Respondent is named as the 56th Defendant.

The dispute in relation to this application is over the validity of the

conferment of the status of tenant cultivatorship over the said 2 Acre

paddy land of lot No. 19 to w.P. Ranmenike, the wife of the deceased tenant

cultivator Y.A. Mendis Singho, under the 4th Respondent's ownership and

its consequential outcome, upon application of the statutory provisions of

Agrarian Development Act No. 46 of 2000 by the 1st to 3rd Respondent.

According to the Petitioner, the several decisions and orders made

by the 1st to 3rd Respondents, the validity of which are challenged in this

application, were made upon a complaint by the 4th Respondent to the

District Office of the Agrarian Services in March 1991, that the said tenant

cultivator was in arrears of rent due upon his undivided 1/14th share, on

the same 2 Acre paddy land, at that point of time, possessed by the

Petitioner's father.

It is claimed by the Petitioner, that her father was not afforded an

opportunity to participate in the inquiry held consequent upon the said

complaint of the 4th Respondent of arrears of rent. The said inquiry report

is dated 31.10.1995 and is marked as P8.

At the inquiry the tenant cultivator, Y.A. Mendis Singho, admitted his

status as the tenant cultivator of the disputed paddy land, not under the 4th

Respondent as his landlord, but under the Petitioner's father. The

inquiring officer nonetheless concluded that Mendis Singho was in fact the

tenant cultivator of the 4th Respondent and since he was in arrears of rent,

ordered to pay Rs.1550.00 to the 4th Respondent under Section 18(1), as

6

arrears of rent for the Maha season of 1990/1991. The Petitioner, seeks

issuance of Writ of Certiorari to quash the said decision P8. She also

challenges the validity of the decisions taken by the Respondent as

reflected in P14(a) and P14(b).

The document P14(a) (mistakenly marked only as "P14"in the

relevant document annexed to the Petition) is a letter addressed to W.P.

Ranmenike, the wife of the deceased tenant cultivator Mendis Singho,

through which the 2nd Respondent, conveyed that, in view of the fact that

her late husband had left arrears of rent in favour of the 4th Respondent,

and that she and her son had continued to cultivate his land but failed to

pay rent, directed her to pay Rs.152,735.00 as arrears of rent for Maha

seasons 1990/1991 to 2013/2014. It is also conveyed that the failure to pay

arrears of rent as directed would result in terminating her tenancy over the

said land, under Section 10(2) of the Agrarian Development Act No. 46 of

2000.

Letter P14(b) also addressed to Ranmenike, by which the 2nd

Respondent informs that her tenant cultivatorship over the disputed

paddy land is terminated upon her failure to pay arrears of rent to the 4th

Respondent and directs her, under Section 10(3) of the Agrarian

Development Act No. 46 of 2000, to vacate from the said paddy land.

With the intervention of the Petitioner's father, representations were

made over the decisions and orders received by Ranmenike, resulted in the

issuance of the letter P21 by the 1st Respondent, who had in effect nullified

the arrears of rent accumulated from Maha season of 1991/1992 up to

Maha season 2013/2014 in view of the fact that the Act No. 46 of 2000 is

7

silent on succession of tenancy, but affirmed her status as the tenant

cultivator of the 4th Respondent over the disputed portion of paddy land

by adopting the findings of the inquiry P8.

Since Ranmenike did not pay arrears of rent, as determined by the

inquiry P8, the 2nd Respondent had thereafter issued P27, directing her to

comply within 30 days of its receipt.

Letter P28(a), issued by the 2nd Respondent, informed Ranmenike of

the termination of her tenancy over the disputed paddy land, upon her

failure to pay arrears of rent and it also directed her to vacate therefrom

and handover its possession to the 4th Respondent. It also indicated that

her failure to comply with the said direction would result in her eviction

through the fiscal of Court. With P28(b), the 2nd Respondent made order

that the tenancy of Ranmenike is terminated and she is ordered under

Section 10(3) of the Act to vacate and hand over possession to the 4th

Respondent and her failure to comply would warrant eviction through the

Court Fiscal.

At the hearing of this application, learned Counsel for the Petitioner

submitted that the initial inquiry findings, upon which most of the

subsequent decisions and orders made by the 1st to 3rd Respondents are

based on, is illegal, ultra vires, unlawful, misconceived, erroneous,

wrongful, irrational, arbitrary, unreasonable, unfair, contrary to the

principles of natural justice and legitimate expectations entertained by the

Petitioner, for the following reasons;

a. the ownership of the disputed paddy land and its landlord

should only be decided by a competent Court,

8

b. even if the 4th Respondent is entitled to his half share from the

disputed paddy land, he is only entitled to a land in extent of one

acre from the 2-acre land,

e. since the Petitioner's father's name appears in the relevant Paddy

Land Register as the landlord/ owner of the said paddy land, the

same is prima facie proof of ownership,

d. no devolution of late Mendis Singho's tenancy rights over to his

wife or son since the Act No. 46 of 2000 did not contain any

provision pertaining to such devolution of the rights of a

deceased tenant,

e. since Ranmenike declined to continue her late husband's tenancy,

the attempt to compel her to pay arrears of rent is totally

misconceived,

f. the Petitioner's father had cultivated the said paddy land since

year 2000, but no notice was served on him to handover

possession,

g. any inquiry into the dispute between the heirs of Mendis Singho

and the 4th Respondent is not contemplated by the applicable

laws,

h. the Respondents have acted contrary to the undertaking of the

2nd Respondent that no action will be taken in relation to the land

rights of the Petitioner.

It appears from the above grounds that are relied upon by the

Petitioner, the focus of the challenge mounted by the Petitioner is

primarily on the inquiry report P8, by which the tenancy of Mendis Singho

and arrears of rent in favour of the 4th Respondent were recognised. In

9

making the decisions and orders in P21, P27, P28(a) and P28(b) that are

sought to be quashed, the 1st to 3rd Respondents have acted on the said

determination on tenancy and arrears of rent as per P8. Even in PI4(a) and

P14(b), the 1st to 3rd Respondents have made their decisions and orders

based on the findings of P8. Hence, the validity of P8 determination will

undoubtedly have a bearing over the validity of all these determinations

and orders that are reflected in P14(a), PI4(b), P21, P28(a) and P28(b)

because all the subsequent decisions and orders are made on the basis that

by P8, the inquiring officer had correctly identified the landlord/ tenant

cultivator relationship between the parties and determined arrears of rent.

The findings of the inquiring officer in P8 were made on 31.10.1995.

The applicable statutory provisions at that point of time could be found in

Section 18(1) of the Agrarian Services Act No. 58 of 1979, which

empowered the Commissioner to inquire into a complaint of arrears of

rent due to a landlord from his tenant cultivator and if the Commissioner

is "satisfied" that the arrears of rent are not being paid, the tenancy of the

defaulting tenant cultivator could be terminated after notice.

The Section 18(1) states;

"When the landlord informs the Commissioner that the

tenant cultivator is in arrear of rent in respect of an extent of

paddy land the Commissioner shall on being satisfied that

the arrears of rent are not being paid, give notice in writing

to the tenant cultivator that his tenancy in respect of such

extent would be terminated if he fails to pay such arrears

within the time specified in such notice"

10

The plain meaning of the section indicate that the Commissioner

must first" satisfied" that" the arrears of rent are not being paid" for him to

proceed to take action prescribed in the section on the defaulting tenant

cultivator.

It is relevant to note that the word "satisfied", as found in Section

18(1), in relation to Public Law considerations, was defined in Walter Leo

v The Land Commissioner 57 NLR 178, by the then Supreme Court, in the

light of reasoning in Liversidge's case (1942) A.c. 206, quoting Lord

Wright. The Court stated;

" ... if a person must be " satisfied" on any point (even for

the purposes of an administrative decision) the word at least

means " reasonably satisfied ", and " cannot import an

arbitrary or irrational state of being satisfied. " A fortiori, if

an inferior tribunal making a judicial decision has to be "

satisfied" that a certain state of facts exists before adopting a

permitted course of action, that state of facts must in fact

exist. The objective test is especially necessary in a context

where a public officer (not required to possess a legal

training) purports to give a decision which, through

misdirection, would defeat the intention of the legislature by

extending the categories of private property liable to

compulsory acquisition."

Thus, the Commissioner, in satisfying that" the arrears of rent are not

being paid "he must first consider whether" a certain state of facts exists before

adopting a permitted course of action, that state of facts must in fact exist". How

this is achieved is described in the judgment of Wickremasuriya v

11

Dedoleena & Others (1996) 2 Sri L.R. 95, where, in relation to an appeal

preferred against the decision of the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian

Services, Jayasuriya J held;

"I hold that the Assistant Commissioner had indulged in a

proper and adequate analysis and evaluation of the respective

evidence placed before him. This court is unable to say that

the Assistant Commissioner (Inquiries) had arrived at an

improper evaluation of the evidence placed before him.

Arriving at determinations with regard to credibility and

testimonial trustworthiness of a witness is a question of fact

and not a question of law. I hold that there is no misdirection

in point of fact or in point of law, nor any defective

procedure discernible from a perusal of both the oral and

documentanj evidence and the order pronounced by the

Assistant Commissioner. In the circumstances, I hold that

the Assistant Commissioner (Inquiries) has arrived at strong

and tenable findings of fact and in the result, this court has

no jurisdiction or power to interfere with the finding of fact

of the Assistant Commissioner and no error of law or issue of

law arises for considera tion upon this appeal."

In view of the reasoning contained in the above cited judgments, if

the conclusion in P8 is reached after proper evaluation of the evidence that

had been presented before the inquirer and thereupon determining" that a

certain state of facts exists", then this Court need not interfere with such a

determination on a question of fact made by the 1st to 3rd Respondents.

12

However, as per the contention advanced by the Petitioner, the

question before this Court for its determination is whether the conclusions

reached and acted upon by the 1st to 3rd Respondents, that Mendis Singho is

in fact the tenant cultivator of the 4th Respondent and "the arrears of rent are

not being paid", are made after proper evaluation of available evidence?

The Petitioner cited the judgment of Herath v Peter (1989) 2 Sri L.R.

325, where this Court held, in relation to a dispute between a land lord and

tenant cultivator over their rights upon a paddy land that;

"Any dispute in respect of a paddy-field arising between a

landlord and a tenant, as defined by the provisions of the said

Act, and in relation to which express provision is made

therein will be regulated by the provisions so contained in

the said Act; and any such dispute would have to be

determined in the manner set ou t in the said Act. Such

dispute cannot be brought before and sought to be

determined by a court of law.

This principle will apply only if the dispu te, which

ames in respect of a paddy-field, is a dispute between a

person, who is a landlord within the meaning of the said law,

and a person, who is a tenant-cultivator within the meaning

of the self-same Act. The two parties to the dispute should

each bear the character which the Act requires that each

should in fact and in law bear and possess, in order to enable

one to enforce the rights the Act gives him against the other,

and to subject the other to perform the obligations which the

13

Act compels him to perform. If one or the other does not in

fact and in law possess the character each is so required to

have and possess, then the provisions of this law cannot be

availed of by one, and be imposed against the other."

In Sawsiriya v Perna 79(1) NLR 332, when a tenant cultivator sought

relief against his eviction, the then Supreme Court was of the view that;

"An Agricultural Tribunal to whom an application has been

made under section 2(3) by a person claiming to be a tenant-

cultivator has to decide the preliminary question whether, at

the time of the alleged eviction, the applicant was a tenant-

cultivator within the meaning of the provisions of the Lands

Law, before proceeding to decide the question whether that

person has been evicted. If on the evidence placed before it,

the Tribunal comes to the conclusion that the applicant has

ceased to be a cultivator within the meaning of section 54."

The inquiry report P8 was a result of a complaint of arrears of rent

by the 4th Respondent by his tenant cultivator. In applying the principles

laid down by the judgments of Herath v Peter (supra) and Sawsiriya v

Perna (supra), in an inquiry into the complaint by the 4th Respondent of

arrears of rent, the inquirer must first decide whether the 4th Respondent

is the landlord of the paddy land in respect of which he claims arrears of

rent, before it proceeds to decide whether Mendis Singho is the tenant

cultivator of that particular paddy land and whether there were any

arrears of rent. This is due to the fact that, in order to claim relief under

Section 18(1) of Agrarian Services Act No. 58 of 1979, "the two parties to the 14

dispute should each bear the character which the Act requires that each should in

fact and in law bear" as per Herath v Peter (supra).

Thus, it was incumbent upon the 2nd Respondent to determine that

the 4th Respondent is in fact the landlord of the paddy land that he claims

to own. This is the most preliminary issue the 2nd Respondent must

decide. The Petitioner's contention that the inquiring officer had acted in

ultra vires when he determined the" ownership" of the paddy land could

not be accepted as the issue of ownership is integral to the preliminary

issue of the validity of the 4th Respondent's claim that he is the landlord of

the specific paddy land. None of the 1st to 3rd Respondents could confer

title of a paddy land to the 4th Respondent. Their investigation into his title

is limited to the extent of satisfying themselves as to the 4th Respondent's

entitlement to relief claimed under the Agrarian Services Act No. 58 of

1979. Therefore, it is a must that they satisfy themselves that the 4th

Respondent is the landlord of the paddy land over which the rent was due.

The Petitioner, in support of her complaint that the inquiring officer

acted ultra vires, also contends that;

a. the 1st and 2nd Respondents have failed to take note that the

Petitioner's father's name appears in the Paddy Lands

Register since 1991, which is prima facie proof of his

ownership over the disputed paddy land,

b. the Petitioner's father had cultivated the paddy land since

the death of Mendis Singho in year 2000 up to date and had

possession of the said land throughout

15

c. even if the 4th Respondent's entitlement of 1/2 share is acted

upon he is not entitled to the possession of the 2 Acre

paddy land in its entirety.

These concerns raised by the Petitioner further enhances the

importance of the determination of the preliminary issue whether the 4th

Respondent is in fact the landlord of the paddy land that he claims to

ownership.

The inquiry proceedings could be found produced along with the

certified proceedings of HCR/RA/ 120/1995 before the Provincial High

Court, annexed to the petition of the Petitioner, marked as Pl0.

At the said inquiry, the 4th Respondent, two of his predecessors in

title Hector Samarasinghe and Sarath Kumara Wijeratne, have made

statements while the Respondent tenant cultivator Mendis Singho and the

Petitioner's father also have made statements in support of their respective

claims.

The 4th Respondent claimed that he had acquired a 1/2 share of the

paddy land called Mahamerige Watta Meda Kella in extent of about 2 Acres

from Sarath Wijeratne on 21.03.1990, while the remaining % share owned by

one Yasawardhana Bandara. The 4th Respondent had been informed by

Wijeratne that the paddy land had no tenant cultivator.

Hector Samarashighe described the devolution of title of the paddy

land. According to him the entire Yaya was a part of Kalawana Nindagama

under Loku Bandara and upon his death, his seven children inherited 1/7th

share each. They have amicably partitioned the land among themselves

and Mahamerige Watta Meda Kella was solely cultivated by Gunawardhana

16

Bandara as his entitlement of 1/7th share. The Petitioner and the 4th

Respondent claim that the said paddy land is depicted as lot No. 19 in plan

No. 1406. It is this Gunawardhana Bandara who had transferred 1/2 share of

his title to Somaratne Bandara, who in turn transferred title to Sarath

Wijeratne. The 4th Respondent acquired title from Sarath Wijeratne on

21.03.1990.

The title of the other 1/2 share owned by Gunawardhana Bandara was

transferred to Yasawardhana Bandara from whom the Petitioner's father

acquired title on 14.03.1990.

Petitioner's father claimed that he accepts the tenancy of Mendis

Singho as his predecessors in title have accepted him as such. He further

claims that the present dispute arose as the 4th Respondent denied the

tenancy of Mendis Singho over his 1/2 share of the paddy land.

It is evident from the inquiry report, that it was revealed during

inquiry of the fact that a partition action No. L 115 was pending before the

District Court. The preliminary plan No. 1406 of the said partition action

was tendered at the said inquiry marked "R3". The P8 report also refers to

this document. It is interesting to note that both the Petitioner and the 4th

Respondent have claimed that the paddy land they own is depicted in the

said plan as lot No. 19, which is in extent of 4 Acres and 15 perches only

before this Court.

The paddy land Mahameruwatte Aluth Asswedduma fMahameruwatte

Asswedduma/Ketagalgode Kumbura is in extent of 29 Acres and 35 perches,

and consists of 20 lots. It was also noted by the inquiring officer that the

common predecessor of both the Petitioner and the 4th Respondent had

17

owned 1/7th share off the total extent of 29 Acres and 35 perches. That

being the case its 1/7th share would be a paddy land in extent of about 4

Acres 28 perches, making the Petitioner's and the 4th Respondent's

entitlement over 2 Acres of paddy land to each of them.

The inquiring officer, in dealing with the 2 Acre extent of the paddy

land, under dispute had observed that it had been "proved" that when the

application of the 4th Respondent was pending for its determination, the

Petitioner's father had made an attempt through Mendis Singho to become

the landlord of the said paddy land in its entirety. This is an indication that

there was in fact an ambiguity as to the correct extent of the paddy land

upon which each of the two contestants are entitled, to upon their 1/2 share,

and the Petitioner's father was alive to his entitlement to a paddy land in

extent of 2 Acres, instead of 1/2 share of a 2 Acre paddy land.

The 4th Respondent had tendered his paper title at the inquiry along

with the one of his immediate predecessor. Deed No. 9382 of 21.03.1990, is

a transfer of the ownership acquired by deed No. 6786, in favour of the 4th

Respondent, and it indicates a 1/2 share of a land in extent of 2 Acres. The

Deed No. 6786, in turn refers to a land in extent of one Acre from his

entitlement from the partition action No. 11S/P.

This poses the legitimate question, as to the identity of the land in

dispute. These deeds limit the 4th Respondent's rights over the disputed

paddy land only to a one Acre in extent, whereas the 1/14th share he had

acquired over the corpus in the partition action, made him entitled to a

paddy land in extent of over 2 Acres.

18

The inquiring officer confers the status of landlord to the 4th

Respondent, in spite of the fact that he denied the tenancy of Mendis

Singho, on the basis that "his predecessors in title" had received rent from the

latter and, in seeking arrears of rent, he admits Mendis Singho's tenancy.

Mendis Singho only admitted paying rent to the predecessor in title of the

father of the Petitioner and not to the 4th Respondent. The mere proof of

payment of rent to previous owners will not make the 4th Respondent the

landlord. He acquired ownership only on 21.03.1990. In his statement to

the inquiring officer on 18.06.1990, the 4th Respondent specifically claimed

that there was no tenant cultivator who cultivated his part of the paddy

land. However, the 4th Respondent demanded rent from Mendis Singho on

12.03.1991 by a letter marked X of Pll. In that letter the 4th Respondent

reminds Mendis Singho only of his 1/2 share and said that he awaits his

share of harvest, not on the basis of tenancy but merely on his share

entitlement.

The basis of accepting the 4th Respondent's claim of tenancy over

Mendis Singo, in spite of the denial of such a relationship by the 4th

Respondent, was on the erroneous factual position that "his" previous

owners have accepted rent when the evidence points to otherwise. The

inquiring officer also holds that when the 4th Respondent claimed arrears

of rent from Mendis Singho, that amounted to an admission of tenancy.

This is factually an erroneous conclusion to reach. The witness called by

the 4th Respondent himself, Hector Samarasinghe, contradicts this position

as he clearly states that one B. Y. Suwastina was the tenant cultivator of that

part of the paddy land and to his knowledge the Paddy Lands Register in

1972 confirms that position. This is a clear indication that prior, to the

19

acquisition of 1/14th share each by the Petitioner and the 4th Respondent,

at some point of time there were two tenant cultivators cultivating under

two landlords in lot 19.

If that is the case, it could reasonably be inferred that the

predecessors in title of both the Petitioner and the 4th Respondent must

have amicably divided the original 1/7th share of paddy land, for the

reason that two tenant cultivators cannot cultivate the same paddy land at

the same time. No evidence to suggest that there was Tattumaru

arrangements. Thus, the predecessors in title of the 4th Respondent, may

have received rent from the said B. Y. Suwastina and certainly not from

Mendis Singho as the inquiring officer had erroneously concluded.

If Mendis Singho was the tenant cultivator who cultivated the full

1/7th share of the paddy land called Mahameriwatta Meda KeIla, then

division each of his two landlord's entitlement of the harvest, poses no

difficulty. But the considerations of an inquiry in relation to arrears of rent

under Section 18(1) of the Agrarian Services Act is different to the simple

act of dividing harvest and should involve a closer scrutiny of the

reliability of the conflicting claims, in view of the statutorily laid down

consequences of its determinations under the said section.

Section 18 of the Agrarian Services Act envisages an eventuality of

non-compliance by a tenant cultivator of the direction by a Commissioner

to make good the arrears of rent. The said section also provides that in the

event of non-compliance of a direction to pay arrears of rent, follows the

consequences of termination of tenancy, an order to vacate from the paddy

land and also an order of eviction. These concerns are in support of the

20

proposition that there must be a paddy land, identifiable with reference to

its bounds and metes, if, in the eventuality of enforcement presents itself

owing to the attendant circumstances, by which such enforcement could

be effectively carried out.

There is no material before the inquiry as to any amicable partition

of the paddy land called Mahameriwatta Meda Kella and there is no material

to conclude that there existed some demarcation or at least an

understanding as to the boundaries of the paddy land by which each of the

1/2 share owners have enjoyed their rights independent of each other. Only

in the petition, it is claimed so. The 4th Respondent disputes that fact.

Therefore the disputed paddy land remains as an undivided land with co-

ownership, in the absence of any arrangement to possess parts of it

separately and independently of each other. It is unfortunate that the

partition action No. lIS/P pending before the District Court of Ratnapura

was dismissed on 31.03.2016 by the judgment 4R1, upon the failure of the

parties to prove their respective claims. But the said dismissal brings the

co-ownership of the Petitioner and the 4th Respondents to back an

undivided 1/2 share each of Lot No. 19.

Therefore, in order to have effective and meaningful dispute

resolution between the 4th Respondent and his alleged tenant cultivator as

provided for in Section 18, the Commissioner should have satisfied himself

as to the identity of the paddy land over which the said Respondent claims

his entitlement of rent. In Wijesuriya v Senaratne (1997) 2 Sri L.R. 323,

Jayasuriya J endorsed the finding of fact by the Assistant Commissioner of

Agrarian Services as to the identity of the paddy land, which he had

arrived at, after undertaking an investigation to ascertain whether the 21

paddy land that had been described differently in the Paddy Lands

Register and by the parties before him, is one and the same.

Section 68 of the Act defines the term "" landlord" with reference" to

an extent of paddy land means the person other than an owner cultivator, who will

for the time being be entitled to the rent in respect of such extent if it were let on

rent to any person, and includes any tenant of such extent who lets it to any

subtenant". Thus, the conferment of the status of a landlord under the

Agrarian Services Act, does not solely rests on the paper title. It includes

an entitlement of rent and that too "in respect of such extent", thereby

allowing some flexibility to an inquirer, to arrive at a determination on the

question of whether an applicant is in fact a landlord, in consideration of

attendant circumstances. The words" in respect of such extent" in the context

of the instant application, denotes the requirement of the determination of

exact extent of the paddy land of which the predecessors in title of the 4th

Respondent have received rent.

It is significant to note from the material before the inquirer that

both the 4th Respondent and the father of the Petitioner have acquired title

to the paddy land within a matter of few days of each other Before even

the question of payment of rent had arisen, the dispute over cultivation

rights of 2 Acre paddy land had erupted resulting in complaints to the 1st

to 3rd Respondents as well as to the Police. Therefore, in order to ascertain

the paddy land and "in respect of such extent", the inquirer should have

focused his mind in the proper identification of the paddy land in respect

of which he conferred the status to the 4th Respondent as landlord, in view

of the claim of the father of the Petitioner that he was in possession of the

paddy land to which he had acquired paper title. The inquiring officer had 22

failed to consider whether the paddy land owned by the 4th Respondent in

fact is the paddy land that had been cultivated by Mendis Singho under a

tenancy, before the former's acquisition of title to it.

In this context and in view of the challenge mounted by the

Petitioner on the validity of the determination P8 on the basis of uItra vires,

it is relevant to cite the judgment Hayley & Co Ltd, v Commercial and

Industrial Workers & Others (1995) 2 Sri L.R. 42, where this Court had

quoted the following portion from statement of Lord Pearce in the

judgment of Anisminic Ltd. v. Foreign Compensation Ltd. (1969) 2 A.C.

147;

" ... Lack of Jurisdiction may arise in various ways. There

may be an absence of those formalities or things which are

conditions precedent to the tribunal having any jurisdiction

to embark on an inquinJ. Or the tribunal may at the end

make an order that it has no jurisdiction to make. Or in the

intervening stage, while engaged on a proper inquinJ, the

tribunal may depart from the rules of natural justice or it

may ask itself the wrong questions, or it may not take into

account matters which it was directed to take into account.

Thereby it would step outside its jurisdiction. It would turn

its inquiry into something not directed by Parliament and

fail to make the inquiry which Parliament did direct. Any of

these things would cause the purported decision to be a

nullity" .

The above reasoning indicates that the inquirer, in determining the

validity of the assertion of the 4th Respondent that he is the landlord of 2

23

Acre plot of Mahameriwatta Meda Kella, had not taken into account, matters

which it was directed to take into account, rendering the said

determination in P8 a nullity.

It is the contention of the 4th Respondent that with the

pronouncement of the Judgment of the Provincial High Court in Writ

Application No. 120/1995, the question of the tenancy of Mendis Singho

over the 4th Respondent's land had "reached finality". It appears that the 4th

Respondent relies on the principle of Res Judicata when he made the said

submission before this Court to impress that the dispute had reached

finality with the dismissal of the Writ Application filed by Mendis Singho

challenging the validity of P8 before the Provincial High Court. The

present Petitioner or her father were not cited in that application as

Respondents and therefore are not parties to that litigation. It is correct

that they seek almost identical remedy against the determination P8 in the

instant application. But since the pronouncement of P8, the 1st to 3rd

Respondents acting on the findings of P8, have proceeded to make several

other consequential orders under the Agrarian Development Act No. 46 of

2000, to the extent of handing over the possession of the paddy land

claimed to have owned and possessed by the Petitioner. This grievance

had not been considered by a Court of Law before.

This consideration brings to focus the position taken up by the 1st to

3rd Respondents that the Petitioner lacks standing to maintain this

application. Certainly the Petitioner has a grievance over the decisions and

orders, contained in P8 and continued through P14(a), P14(b), P21, P27,

P28(a) and P28(b) since these decisions, if put into effect, will adversely

affect against his interest over the paddy land he claims to be in possession 24

of. Thus, the Petitioner "has a genuine grievance" to seek Writ of Certiorari,

as per the judgment of this Court Forbes and Walker Tea Brockers v

Maligaspe & Others (1998) 2 Sri L.R. 378.

In relation to the decisions and orders of the l,t to 3rd Respondents in

P14(a), P14(b), P21, P27, P28(a) and P28(b), this Court already noted the

common thread which runs through all these decisions is the status of 4th

Respondent as the landlord of the tenant cultivator Mendis Singho, under

the Agrarian Services Act.

Mendis Singho died in the year 2000 and it appears that until his

death, he had not settled the arrears of rent as per the decision of P8, which

had been communicated to him through P9. The several decisions and

orders in P14(a), P14(b), P21, P27, P28(a) and P28(b) were made under the

Agrarian Development Act No. 46 of 2000 and after the death of said

Mendis Singho. In continuing with the claim of arrears of rent, the l,t to 3rd

Respondents have proceeded to impute the arrears on the heirs of late

Mendis Singho as reflected in P14(a), P14(b), P21, P27, P28(a) and P28(b).

In P14(a), the 2nd Respondent stated that since the death of tenant

cultivator Mendis Singho, "the Courts have accepted his wife w.P. Ranmenike,

as a party to the appeal filed by him" and therefore directing the said W.P.

Ranmenike and her son Y.A. Viraj Kumara Jayatilaka, to pay the arrears of

rent to the 4th Respondents. The total of arrears of rent for the period

commencing from 1990/1991 to 2013/2014 Maha Season, is quantified as

Rs. 152,735.00. Since there was no compliance, P14 terminated the tenancy

and directed the heirs to vacate from the paddy land. However, by P21, the

25

:

1st Respondent had nullified the directives P14(a) and P14(b) retaining the

decision made in P8 that the arrears of rent of Rs. 1550.00.

The 2nd Respondent by P27 directed the heirs of Mendis Singho to

settle the arrears of rent and warned that non-compliance would result in

their eviction from the paddy land. Both P28(a) and (b) directed them to

handover possession of the paddy land to the 4th Respondent and failure

would result in the eviction by Fiscal of Court.

In challenging the validity of these decisions and orders made by the

1st to 3rd Respondents, the Petitioner contends that Agrarian Development

Act had no statutory provisions governing the succession of tenancy rights

after the death of the tenant cultivator. The Petitioner states that the heirs

of Mendis Singho have already informed the 1st to 3rd Respondents that they

do not wish to continue as tenant cultivators under her father and are not

in possession of any paddy land. Therefore she states that they have no

interest in the matter.

Section 1D of the Agrarian Development (Amendment) Act No. 46

of 2011, provided for the "Devolution of the rights of tenant cultivators" where

the rights of a tenant cultivator devolve on the surviving spouse of such

tenant cultivator Whether these provisions are applicable retrospectively

to the tenancy of Mandis Singho, who died in the year 2000, was not

considered by the 1st to 3rd Respondents. But they have proceeded to

continue with the imposition of arrears of rent due from Mendis Singho on

his wife Ranmenike simply on the basis that she was substituted by the

Court to prosecute the appeal. The fact she was substituted by this Court

to prosecute an appeal was perceived by the Respondents as an act of

26

judicial acceptance of her substitution to the tenancy as well. This clearly is

an erroneous conclusion reached by the 1st to 3rd Respondents. In Careem v

Sivasubramaniam & Another (2003) 2 Sri L.R. 197, this Court has held that,

upon an application for substitution of an appeal pending before this

Court," ... the only order that this Court could make would be that the "proper

person" to be substituted in place of the deceased-appellant would be the petitioner for

the limited purpose of prosecuting the appeal and nothing more." Therefore, solely

upon the fact that she was substituted to prosecute an appeal before this

Court, that had been preferred by her late husband, does not mean that she

represented his estate before this Court. The conferment of the title tenant

cultivator to her based on substitution, is also clearly an erroneous

decision.

This Court accordingly holds that the decisions and orders made by

the 1st to 3rd Respondents, as reflected in the documents P14(a), P14(b),

P21, P27, P28(a) and P28(b) are tainted with illegality and are made in ultra

vIres.

In the circumstances, this Court answers the issue it had raised at

the outset of this judgment that whether the conclusions reached and acted

upon by the 1st to 3rd Respondents, that Mendis Singho is in fact the tenant

cultivator of the 4th Respondent and "the arrears of rent are not being paid",

are made after proper evaluation of available evidence, in the negative

and order, quashing the decisions and orders that are reflected in P8,

P14(a), P14(b), P21, P27, P28(a) and P28(b) as prayed for by the Petitioner.

This Court further directs the 2nd Respondent to hold a fresh inquiry on

the application of the 4th Respondent to determine the issue whether late

27

; ..

Mendis Singho was the tenant cultivator of the said paddy land claimed by

the 4th Respondent and whether there is arrears of rent.

In view of the said determination by this Court the issuance of Writs

of Prohibition and Mandamus as sought by the Petitioner does not arise for

consideration, as these reliefs were sought pending determination of the

said partition action, which had been dismissed.

Parties will bear their costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

28