IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Ven. Prof. Muwaetagama

Gnanananda Thero,

Sirivijitha Maha Viharaya,

New Elpitiya South,

Gelioya,

Kandy.

Petitioner

CASE NO: CA/WRIT/376/2015

Vs.

Bhikku University of Sri Lanka,

Puttalam Road,

Anuradhapura.

and 31 Others.

Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: S.C.B. Walgampaya, P.C., with Upendra

Walgampaya for the Petitioner.

Susantha Balapatabendi, Senior D.S.G., for the 1st-

32nd Respondents.

Manohara de Silva, P.C., with Harsha Munasinghe

for the 32nd Respondent.

Decided on: 16.01.2019

2

Samayawardhena, J.

Applications have been called for the post of Mahopadyaya (Vice

Chancellor) of the 1st respondent Bhikku University from Bhikku

applicants.

There is a procedure laid down in the Buddhasravaka Bikku

University Act, No. 26 of 1996, as amended by Act No. 15 of

2012, in that process. The parts of the Act relevant for the

present purposes read as follows:

7(1)(b) The Mahopadayaya of the university shall be a

disciplined Upasampada Bhikku who has completed

twenty years after Upasampada. He shall be a person

holding a post-graduate degree in Buddhist Studies or in

any other subject connected thereto from a recognized

university on a research done within a period of not less

than two years and having ten years experience in the

field of teaching. In addition he shall be required to

possess a good knowledge of oriental languages.

7(2)(ii) The council shall select three names from among

Bhikku applicants who possess the qualifications specified

in subsection (1)(b) and submit those names to the

Uththarithara Sabhawa constituted under section 12 of this

Act.

7(2)(iii) The Uththarithara Sabhawa constituted under

section 12 of this Act shall examine the educational and

other qualifications of the Bhikku applicants and select and

recommend the name of one Bhikku applicant to the

3

President through the Minister, within three months of the

submission of the names.

7(2)(iv) The Bhikku recommended by the Uththarithara

Sabhawa shall be appointed by the President as the

Mahopadayaya of the university for a period of three years.

No Bhikku shall be appointed as Mahopadayaya of the

university for more than two consecutive terms.

Several Bhikkus including the petitioner (Ven. Prof.

Muwaetagama Gnanananda Thero) and the 32nd respondent

(Ven. Dr. Waradiwela Wijayasumana Thero) have applied for the

post.

The Council of the 1st respondent university (consisting of the

6th-19th Respondents) has sent three names, which included the

names of the petitioner and the 32nd respondent, to the

Uththarithara Sabhawa to take the final decision.

The Uththarithara Sabhawa (consisting of the 5th, 20th-31st

respondents including the incumbent Mahopadyaya of the

University, Mahanayaka Theros of Malwatta, Asgiriya,

Amarapura Chapters, Mahanayaka Thero of Ramanna Maha

Nikaya, Chief Incumbent of Atamastanaya) has unanimously

decided to select and recommend the 32nd respondent for the

said post.

The petitioner has filed this writ application seeking to challenge

the said decision of the Uththarithara Sabhawa.

The petitioner states that the said decision contains an error of

law on the face of the record, and is illegal, null and void and of

4

no force or effect in law and therefore shall be quashed by way of

certiorari.

On what basis does the petitioner state so? The petitioner says

that:

In terms of section 7(1)(b) of the said Act one of the essential

qualifications for selection and appointment as

Mahopadyaya is that the candidate for appointment should

hold a post-graduate degree in Buddhist Studies or in any

other subject connected thereto from a recognized university

on a research done within a period of not less than two

years and having ten years experience in the field of

teaching. In addition he shall be required to possess a good

knowledge of oriental studies.

While the petitioner possesses the above qualifications, the

32nd respondent does not possess the qualifications.

The petitioner says that the 32nd respondent does not possess

required qualifications in two respects: the 32nd respondent does

not have a post graduate degree in Buddhist Studies, and also

he does not have a good knowledge of oriental languages.

On what material does the petitioner come to that conclusion?

That is by looking at the curriculum vitae cum the mission

statement of the 32nd respondent tendered to the University

Council marked P5 as part of the selection process.

The petitioner states that according to P5, both the 32nd

respondents post graduate qualificationsM.Phil and Ph.Dare

in the field of Education and Sociology and not in the field of

5

Buddhist Studies. This is disputed by the respondentsthe

University Council, the Uththarithara Sabhawa and the 32nd

respondent in their objections.

The title of the thesis successfully submitted to the university in

fulfilment of the requirements of the M.Phil degree of the 32nd

respondent when translated into English is titled: The

Educational Value of the Concept of Management as reflected in

Buddhism. The 32nd respondent whilst tendering a copy of the

thesis marked 32R1, in his statement of objections states:

This research is based on a deep and comprehensive

research of Sutta Pitakaya and Vinaya Pitakaya. In this

research Buddhist thoughts, values and concepts related to

Management concepts were researched through a deep

study of Sutta Pitakaya and Vinaya Pitakaya. I dealt

with how the modern Management concepts could be

shaped and developed utilizing the Buddhist thoughts

reflected in Sutta Pitakaya and Vinaya Pitakaya.

The title of the thesis successfully submitted to the university in

fulfilment of the requirements of the Ph.D degree of the 32nd

respondent when translated into English is titled: The Concept

of Socialization as depicted in Early BuddhismAn Analytical

Study. Whilst tendering a copy of the thesis marked 32R6, the

32nd respondent in his statement of objections states in this

regard as follows:

Samajanuyojanaya means the way of adopting new

members of society in accordance with such society. In this

research it was studied through the Sutta Pitakaya and

6

Vinaya Pitakaya how Buddhist thoughts and concepts

and principles have addressed this Samajanuyojanaya

concept. Therefore this research too is based on a deep and

comprehensive research of Sutta Pitakaya and Vinaya

Pitakaya. The analysis is made under the following

chapters which are reproduced below for convenience of

Court.

(1) Introduction

(2) Buddhist Concept of Man

(3) Buddhist Concept of Society

(4) Buddhist Concept of Socialization/

Samajanuyojanaya

(5) Uttara and Ati Uttara Pawrusheeya

Samajanuyojanaya: In this chapter it was studied

that how people are shaped and introduced to the

society and the path which they ought to be followed

to attain Nibbana after they enter the Buddhist

order.

Therefore the 32nd respondent states that My M.Phil and Ph.D

are directly connected to Buddhist Studies and philosophy.

I must stress that this has not been denied by the respondent

University Council and the Uththarithara Sabhawa.

It is significant to note that, according to section 7(1)(b), the

applicant shall have a post-graduate degree in Buddhist Studies

or in any other subject connected thereto. Therefore, even

assuming not conceding that the postgraduate degrees of the

32nd respondent are not directly in Buddhist Studies, they are at

7

least connected to Buddhist Studies. Hence, the contention of

the petitioner that the 32nd respondent does not have a

postgraduate degree in Buddhist Studies and therefore he is

disqualified to be selected as Mahopadyaya is misconceived both

in law and fact.

The next point of the petitioner is that the 32nd respondent does

not have a good knowledge of oriental languages as, according to

the curriculum vitae marked P5, the 32nd respondent has only

Grade B for Pali in G.C.E. (A/L) examination, and has obtained

only the Pracheena Praramba qualifications at the G.C.E. (O/L)

and (A/L) examinations for Sinhala, Pali and Sanskrit.

It is noteworthy that, according to section 7(1)(b), the applicant

shall only possess a good knowledge of oriental languages. The

applicant need not have paper qualifications for that purpose.

Hence, the contention of the petitioner that the 32nd respondent

does not have a good knowledge of oriental languages based on

the curriculum vitae and therefore he is disqualified to be

selected as Mahopadyaya is also misconceived both in law and

fact.

It is relevant to note that in terms of section 7(2)(iii), the

Uththarithara Sabhawa shall examine the educational and other

qualifications of the Bhikku applicants and select and

recommend the name of one Bhikku applicant to the President

to be appointed as Mahopadyaya.

What are the other qualifications the 32nd respondent possess,

which the petitioner in paragraph 15 of the counter affidavit

says irrelevant.

8

The 32nd respondent has:

(1) At that time completed 37 years after higher ordination

(whereas according to section 7(1)(b) the applicant shall

have only 20 years).

(2) Joined the 1st respondent Bikku University as a

Temporary Lecturer and rose to the post of Senior

Lecturer Grade 1.

(3) Served in the said university as the acting Vice Chancellor

more than ten times.

(4) Served as the Dean of the Faculty of Language and

Cultural Studies for three years.

(5) Served as the Head of the Department of Social Studies

and Comparative Studies.

(6) Served as a Member of both University Council and the

Senate.

(7) Served as a Student Counsel.

(8) Served as a Member or Chairman in many Committees

such as Finance Committee, Leave Committee, Accounting

Committee, Mahapola Aramudala Committee,

Examination Branch, External Exam Committee,

Examination Fraud Investigating Committee, Examination

Reforms Committee, Research and Publication Committee,

Library Committee, Post Graduate Committee.

According to section 7(4) of the Act, Mahopadyaya shall be the

Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Academic Officer of the

9

Bikku University, and that may be the reason why the Act

provides that the Uththarithara Sabhawa shall examine not only

the educational qualifications but also the other qualifications of

the Bhikku applicants in selecting one for the said position.

In between the petitioner and the 32nd respondent, there is no

dispute that the 32nd respondent is more senior and more

experienced than the petitioner.

I see nothing wrong in the decision taken by the Uththarithara

Sabhawa to select and recommend the 32nd respondent for the

post of Mahopadyaya of the 1st respondent university. There is

absolutely no error of law on the face of the record to quash that

decision by way of writ of certiorari. There is no substantive or

procedural ultra vires in that process.

This Court in the guise of exercising writ jurisdiction cannot

usurp the powers vested by law in the Uththarithara Sabhawa

and reassess the qualifications of the petitioner and the 32nd

respondent and select the better one for the said post.

Is it reasonable for the petitioner to expect this Court to read the

theses of the 32nd respondent and decide whether the latters

post-graduate degrees are in Buddhist Studies or in any other

subject connected thereto? This Court without specialized

knowledge and skills is ill equipped to decide them. On the

other hand, what is the proof before this Court that the

petitioners post-graduate degrees are in Buddhist Studies or in

any other subject connected thereto except his ipse dixit in

paragraph 15(ii) of the petition and corresponding affidavit that

10

While I possess the above qualifications, the 32nd respondent

does not possess the qualifications?

Under judicial review, this Court, unless there is an obvious

error on the face of the record, will not overturn a decision on

merits.1 In any event, this is not possible when the facts are in

dispute as in this case.

In Kalamazoo Industries Ltd v. Minister of Labour & Vocational

Training2, the petitioners sought to quash the arbitral award by

certiorari and prohibition. Dismissing that application,

Jayasuriya J. inter alia stated:

There is no misdirection in point of fact or law which

vitiates the award. There is no failure on the part of the

arbitrator to take into consideration the effect of the totality

of the oral and documentary evidence placed before him

and there is no improper evaluation of the evidence placed

before the arbitrator on a consideration of the award and

the totality of the evidence placed before him in this matter.

This court must keep prominently in forefront that it is

exercising in this instance a very limited jurisdiction quite

distinct from the exercise of appellate jurisdiction. Relief by

way of certiorari in relation to an award made by an

arbitrator will be forthcoming to quash such an award only

if the arbitrator wholly or in part assumes a jurisdiction

which he does not have or exceeds that which he has or

acts contrary to principles of natural justice or pronounces

1 Vide my Judgment in Chithrasiri v. National Gem and Jewellery Authority, CA/WRIT/38/2016 decided on 31.05.2018 2 [1998] 1 Sri LR 235 at 248-249

11

an award which is eminently irrational or unreasonable or

is guilty of an illegality. The remedy by way of certiorari

cannot be made use of to correct errors or to substitute a

correct order for a wrong order and if the arbitrator's award

was not set aside in whole or in part, it had to be allowed

to stand unreversed. It is pertinent to refer to the principles

laid down by Prof. H. W. R. Wade on "Administrative Law"

12th edition at pages 34 to 35 wherein the learned author

states: "Judicial review is radically different from the

system of appeals. When hearing an appeal, the court is

concerned with the merits of the decision under appeal. But

in judicial review, the court is concerned with its legality.

On appeal, the question is right or wrong. On review, the

question is lawful or unlawful..judicial review is a

fundamentally different operation. Instead of substituting

its own decision for that of some other body, as happens

when an appeal is allowed, a court, on review, is concerned

only with whether the act or order under attack should be

allowed to stand or not". In the circumstances the objective

of this court upon judicial review in this application is to

strictly consider whether the whole or part of the award of

the arbitrator is lawful or unlawful. This court ought not to

exercise its appellate powers and jurisdiction when

engaged in the exercise of supervisory jurisdiction and

judicial review of an award of an arbitrator.

In Public Interest Law Foundation v. Central Environmental

Authority3 Gunawardana J. held:

3 [2001] 3 Sri LR 330 at 334

12

There is a distinction between appeal and review. If one

appeals against a decision, one is claiming that the decision

is wrong and that appellate authority or court should

change the decision. The Court of Appeal, if it is persuaded

by the merits of the case (appeal), may allow the appeal

and thereby substitute its view for that of the Court or

tribunal of first instance. Under judicial review procedure,

the Court of Appeal is not concerned with the merits of the

case, that is, whether the decision was right or wrong, but

whether the decision is lawful or not. In the words of Lord

Brightman: "Judicial review is concerned, not with the

decision but with the decision making process" (Chief

Constable of North Wales Police v. Evans [1982] 1 WLR

1155 at 1173) It is worth observing that the review

procedure is not well suited to determination of disputed

facts-factual issues arising in this case being imprecise and

disputed.

This application of the petitioner is clearly devoid of merit. Even

though the decision was taken by the Uththarithara Sabhawa to

select and recommend the 32nd respondent for the above post as

far back as on 16.06.2015, formal appointment could not be

made because of the ex parte interim order obtained by the

petitioner from the previous Bench of this Court on 06.10.2015,

which is still in operation. This is a huge, if not irreparable, loss

to the 32nd respondent, who is to retire in a few years time.

I dismiss the application of the petitioner. The petitioner shall

pay a sum of Rs.200,000/= as costs of the action to the 32nd

respondent.

13

Judge of the Court of Appeal