CA (PHC) APN 0069/23

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for revision

in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution

of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka, read with Section 364 and 365 of

the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15

of 1979.

Court of Appeal The Director General

Application No: Commissioner to Investigate Allegations of

CA (PHC) APN 0069/23 Bribery and Corruption,

Malalasekera Mawatha, Colombo-07.

High Court of Colombo Complainant

No.HCB/95/21

Vs.

Sivapadham Sadhananthan

No. 198/A, Hospital Road,

Batticoloa.

Accused

AND NOW BETEEEN

CA (PHC) APN 0069/23

2 | P a g e

The Director General

Commissioner to Investigate Allegation of

Bribery and Corruption,

No. 36, Malalasekera Mawatha,

Colombo-07.

Complainant-Petitioner

Vs.

Sivapadham Sadhananthan

No. 198/A, Hospital Road,

Batticoloa.

Accused-Respondent

BEFORE : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

P. Kumararatnam, J.

COUNSEL : Anusha Sammandapperuma, Assistant

Director Legal for the Petitioner.

Saliya Pieris, PC for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 07/11/2023.

DECIDED ON : 22/03/2024.

******************************

CA (PHC) APN 0069/23

3 | P a g e

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The Accused-Respondent (Hereinafter referred to as the Respondent)

was indicted in the High Court of Colombo for solicitation and

acceptance of money as a gratification at various occasions from a

person called Nagalingam Thangamma the virtual complainant, to

perform his duty which is an offence punishable under Section 19(b) 19

(c) of the Bribery Act No. 11 of 1954 as amended.

According to the Complainant-Petitioner (Hereinafter referred to as the

Petitioner) the offences with which the Respondent was charged were

framed sequel to a Criminal Investigation conducted by the Commission

to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption (Hereinafter referred

to as CIABOC. The Information which prompted an investigation was

received on 03.04.2018 and the Commission approved an Authorized

Investigation Officer to conduct a criminal investigation against the

Respondent.

The Investigation Officer having satisfied the statement recorded from

the complainant, conducted a raid on 05.04.2018 and arrested the

Respondent while he was accepting a sum of Rs. 5,000/- from the

complainant. Upon consideration of the investigation notes pertains to

this raid, the Petitioner had been directed on 25.02.2021 to institute

criminal proceedings against the Respondent in the High Court, in

terms of Section 11 of the CIABOC Act. The indictment styled HCB

95/2021 in the High Court of Colombo contained 12 charges.

As the Counsel for the defence informed Court that they were going to

take a preliminary objection, the Learned High Court Judge fixed the

CA (PHC) APN 0069/23

4 | P a g e

matter to be called on 10.03.2022. The indictment was not served on

the Respondent on 10.03.2022, the Learned High Court Judge directed

the defence Counsel to file their preliminary objection in writing. Hence,

the matter fixed to be called on 03.06.2022.

The defence, placed their preliminary objection on the premise that, the

all Commissioners of the CIABOC had not given directive to the Director

General to proceed with the criminal investigation which caused the

institution of criminal proceedings in this matter.

The defence, having referred to Anoma Polwatta v The Commission to

Investigate Allegation of Bribery and Corruption SC/Writ

Application No. 01/2011 contended that the indictment premised

upon the said investigation is void in abinitio and urged the learned trial

judge to dismiss the indictment.

In reply to the preliminary objection raised, the Petitioner submitted to

Court that there is no single provision in the Bribery Act or CIABOC Act

or any judicial pronouncement which made it mandatory for all three

commissioners to give a directive to commence a criminal investigation.

Upholding the preliminary objection raised by the Respondent, the

Learned High Court had dismissed the indictment discharging the

Respondent.

The Petitioner had submitted following grounds and invoke the

extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court.

i. The order dated 21.10.2022 is contrary to law.

ii. The said order is infested with illegality since learned High

Court Judge has entailed sanctioning of criminal investigation

by all three commissioners on a prerequisite to the institution

of Criminal proceedings in the High Court which is not known

to the Law.

CA (PHC) APN 0069/23

5 | P a g e

iii. The learned Trial Judge erred in law by failing to consider that

in terms of Section 2(8) of the CIABOC Act No. 19 of 1994, the

members of the Commission may exercise the powers conferred

on the Commission either sitting together or separately and

where a member of the Commission exercises any such power

sitting separately, his acts shall be deemed to be the act of the

Commission.

iv. The learned Trail Judge erred in law in failing to consider that

the decided case of Anoma Polwatte Vs. Jayawickrama and

others SC/Writ/1/2011 was a judgment of the Supreme Court

pursuant to a writ application challenging the institution of an

action under Section 78 (1) of the Bribery Act No. 11 of 1954

and that the Respondent was not entitled to challenge a

decision of the Commission without resorting to the proper

remedy granted in terms of Section 24 (1) of the CIABOC Act

No. 19 of 1994.

v. The learned Trail Judge erred in law by failing to consider that

the investigation and the institution of proceedings constitutes

a Power of the Commission in terms of Section 16 (3) of the

CIABOC Act No. 19 of 1994.

vi. The learned Trail Judge has misconceived in law in holding

that the directive of the Commission is required under Sec. 3

of CIABOC Act, not only to institute the proceedings but also to

investigate the allegations, contained in communication made

under Sec. 4 of CIABOC Act.

CA (PHC) APN 0069/23

6 | P a g e

vii. The said order is clearly in error as the learned trail Judge

misdirected himself in considering the ratio decidendi in

Anoma Polwatta Vs the Commission to Investigate

Allegation of Bribery and Corruption SC/Writ Application

No. 1/2011 applicable to institution of proceeding and the

investigation.

viii. The learned trial judge misconceived in law in holding that

section 78 (1) of Bribery Act is applicable to institution of

proceedings before the High Court.

ix. The learned Trail Judge erred in law by failing to consider the

judicial pronouncement of the Court of Appeal in

CA/PHC/APN/2/2021 decided on 01/11/2021 wherein the

Court of Appeal recognized the distinction between a criminal

proceeding instituted before High Court in terms of Section 11

and 12 of the CIABOC Act No. 19 of 1994 vis a vis a criminal

proceeding instituted in terms of Section 78 (1) of Bribery Act

No. 11 of 1954 in the Magistrates Court and upheld the

position that, the decided case of Anoma Polwatte Vs.

Jayawickrama and others SC/Writ/1/2011 has no application

for institution of criminal proceedings before High Court.

Criminal proceeding instituted before High Court in

terms of Section 11 and 12 of the CIABOC Act No. 19 of

1994.

Criminal proceeding instituted before Magistrates Court

in terms of Section 78 (1) of Bribery Act No. 11 of 1954.

x. The Learned Trial judge has erroneously determined that, the

Supreme Court Judgement Anoma Polwatte Vs. Jayawickrama

and others [SC/Writ/1/2011] should be considered since it has

been pronounced by the Supreme Court, and the Judgement

CA/PHC/APN/2/2021 should be disregarded just because it

has been pronounced by the Court of Appeal.

CA (PHC) APN 0069/23

7 | P a g e

xi. The learned trial judge has erroneously determined that the

criminal investigation conducted by the Commission in this

matter is contrary to law.

xii. The learned Trail judge has misconceived in law in holding

that, that, the Supreme Court Case Anoma Polwatte Vs.

Jayawickrama and others [SC/Writ/1/2011] was also decided

regarding Section 78 (1) of Bribery Act and erred in law by

failing to consider that, in the case of Anoma Polwatte Vs.

Jayawickrama and others [SC/Writ/1/2011], their Lordship

had not made any observation on Section 78 of the Bribery Act.

xiii. The Court of Appeal erred in Law in failing to consider and

applicability of section 114 (D) of the Evidence Ordinance to

the instant case.

xiv. The Learned Trial Judge has errored in law in failing to give

valid reasons of the order dated 21st October, 2022.

xv. The said order is contrary to the legal maxim of Ut res magis

valeat quam pereat as in invalidated the purpose of the existing

laws on Bribery and Corruption rather than giving some effect.

The defence, in the High Court, placed their preliminary objection on

the premise that, all the Commissioners of the CIABOC had not given

directive to the Director General to proceed with the criminal

investigation which caused the institution of criminal proceedings in

this matter.

CA (PHC) APN 0069/23

8 | P a g e

Section 2(8) of the CIABOC Act No. 19 of 1994 states:

The members of the Commission may exercise the powers

conferred on the Commission either sitting together or separately

and where a member of the Commission exercises any such

power sitting separately, his acts shall be deemed to be the act of

the Commission.

In this case, as admitted by the Counsel for the Petitioner, all three

Commissioners had not signed the order to investigate the complaint

against the Respondent. According to Section 2(8) CIABOC Act, no such

expressed provision mentioned in the Act. Hence, the Counsel for the

Petitioner argues that all three Commissioners need not be singed in

order.

In this case since the Director General of the Commission has filed the

indictment in the High Court of Colombo based in the directive given to

him by the Commission in terms of Section 11 of the Act. The

requirements that should be fulfilled by CIABOC when forwarding an

indictment before the High Court is identified under Section 12(1) and

(2) of the CIABOC Act which reads as follows:

Section 12(1):

Where proceedings are instituted in a High Court, in

pursuance of a direction made by the Commission under

Section 11 by an indictment singed by the Director

General, such High Court shall receive such indictment

and shall have jurisdiction to try the offence described in

all respects as if such indictment were an indictment

presented by the Attorney General to such Court.

CA (PHC) APN 0069/23

9 | P a g e

Section 12(2):

There shall be annexed to every such indictment, in

addition to the documents which are required by the Code

of Criminal Procedure Act, No.15 of 1979, to be annexed

thereto, a copy of the statements, if any, before the

Commission, by the accused and by every person intended

to be called as a witness by the prosecution.

Apart from questioning the requirements under Section 12(1) and (2) of

the CIABOC Act, the High Court has no power to question the validity of

the indictment. Any such challenge can be possible only before the

Supreme Court, in terms of Section 24 of the Act.

In Indikatiya Hewage Kusumadasa Mahanama and Another v. The

Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption and

Another SC TAB 1A and 1B/2000, decided on 11.01.2023, the

Supreme Court held that:

In the circumstances it is clear that, the Supreme Court when

deciding Anoma S.Polwatte v. Director General Commission to

Investigate Allegation of Bribery and Corruption (supra) had

never intended to impose an additional requirement to submit a

written directive when filing charges before Court, and therefore this

Court is not inclined to impose an additional requirement other than

the provisions already identified.

His Lordship further said that:

As observed by us, when deciding the above case, this Court had

never intended to impose an additional requirement of submitting a

written directive given by the Commission when forwarding an

indictment by the Director General CIABOC to High Court other

CA (PHC) APN 0069/23

10 | P a g e

than following the provisions already identified under Sections

12(I) and (II) of the CIABOC Act. If the Director General is directed

under Section 11 of the CIABOC Act by the CIABOC to forward an

indictment, he is only bound to follow the provisions in Section 12

(I) and (II) of the CIABOC Act. In the absence of any complaint, that

the Director General CIABOC had failed to comply with Sections

12(I) and (II) of the CIABOC Act when forwarding the indictment

before the High Court at Bar it is correct in refusing the

jurisdictional objection raised on behalf of the 2nd Accused before

the High Court at Bar. The Trial Judge before whom the indictment

is filed is therefore bound to accept the indictment and take up the

trial unless there is material to establish that Director General

CIABOC had failed to comply with the provisions of Sections 12 (1)

and (2) of the CIABOC Act. Any party who intends to challenge an

indictment forwarded by the Director General CIABOC on the basis

that, the CIABOC had failed to comply with Section 11 of the

CIABOC Act, the said challenge could only be raised in an

appropriate action filed before an appropriate forum.

Considering the Supreme Court Judgment cited above, and the Section

2(8) of the Bribery Act, written sanction requirement is unnecessary

and only cause an additional requirement which certainly obstruct or

delay the smooth function of the Bribery Act. This Court satisfies that

the Bribery Commission had given required directions to institute

proceeding in the High Court of Colombo against the Respondent.

As the Petitioner had established sufficient exceptional grounds before

this court, this Court exercising the discretionary remedy of revision,

set aside the order dated 21/10/2022 of the Learned High Court Judge

of Colombo.

CA (PHC) APN 0069/23

11 | P a g e

The Learned High Court Judge is hereby directed to revert the case

back to the case role of the Court and issue notice to the Respondent,

and commence the trial and conclude the same expeditiously.

Therefore, the revision is allowed.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this Judgment to the

High Court of Colombo for necessary action forthwith.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL