1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A No. 1261/00(F) A. Ranjani Kumaranayake

D.C.Embilipitiya No. 4758/L Land No. 555, Kiriebbenara

Embilipitiya

Plaintiff

Vs

Somapala Gamage

Land No. 36, Bogaha Handiya

Kiriebbanara

Defendant

AND NOW BETWEEN

Somapala Gamage

Land No. 36, Bogaha Handiya

Kiriebbanara

Defendant-Appellant

Vs

A. Ranjani Kumaranayake

Land No. 555, Kiriebbenara

Embilipitiya

Plaintiff-Respondent

BEFORE: Deepali Wijesundera J.,

M.M.A. Gaffoor, J.,

COUNSEL Thushari Hirimutugala with H. Wijeratne for the Defendant Appellant

Kapila Sooriyarachchi with Vases Sakalasuriya for the Plaintiff Respondent

ARGUED ON: 15.02.2016

1

j 1

I ! 1 1 -,

1 1 1 j

J , ! ! I

2

DECIDED ON: 05.05.2016

Gaffoor J.,

This is an appeal preferred by the Defendant Appellant (hereinafter

referred to as the "Defendant") to have the judgment dated 23.08.2000 of the

learned District Judge of Embilipitiya set aside and to enter judgment in favour

of the Defendant.

This is a possessory action filed by the Plaintiff Respondent (hereinafter

referred to as the "Plaintiff') against the Defendant. The Plaintiff states in her

plaint that since 1970, she has been possessing and cultivating the land in

dispute with banana, peanuts, onions etc., and in 1986, this land was surveyed

and identified by the Mahaweli Authorities as Lot 769 ~.

On or about 27.10.1992, the Defendant had disturbed the Plaintiff's

possession by encroaching on it, and over this dispute there was a case bearing

No. 19918 in the Primary court of Embilipitiya under section 66 of the Primary

Courts Procedure Act. It is on record that the learned Magistrate had ordered to

seize the plantation of the Plaintiff valued at Rs. 20,072/- , which amount is

deposited to the credit of the Primary court case. The Defendant had been

placed in possession in the Primary Court case. Against this, the Plaintiff has

filed this case in the District Court of Embilipitiya by presenting a plaint dated

27.09.1993, praying for judgment in her favour, for possession of the land and

for the return of the sum of Rs. 20072/-. deposited in the Primary court case.

l

I

f

3

IDENTITY OF THE LAND

The Primary contention of the Defendant's Counsel before this court is

that the Plaintiff has failed to identify the land in dispute. While the Plainiff has

given some boundaries for the land described in the schedule to the Plaint, the

Defendant has given some other boundaries in his Answer. Be as it may be, the

land is identified as Lot "769 Yz" by the Plaintiff, as well as by the Defendant and

there is no dispute as to this Lot Number.

Furthermore when the dispute was referred to the Primary Court the

Defendant did not raise any dispute as to the identity of the land. The crop was

seized by an order of the court and its value of Rs. 20,072/- was deposited in

court. When the crop was seized, it was admitted by the Defendant that the

land in dispute was the land on which the crop was standing. Although the

parties refer to a land by different boundaries yet, unmistakenly the Lot

number is admitted by the parties as Lot 769 Yz.

In the further written submissions para. 9, Counsel for the Defendant

Appellant states this: (a) "though the reference number of the land described in

the schedule to the Plaint and the land identified by the representatives of the

Mahaweli Authority, who testified on behalf of the Defendant, are identical, the

boundaries of the two lands and their respective nature are different from each

other." Thus, it is admitted that though the nature is different, the land is

identified as the same as the one referred to by Lot No. 769 1/2.

Therefore, the contention that the Plaintiff has failed to identify the land

is untenable. In this regard the learned District Judge says in his judgment that

the case be determined on the evidence. The land described in the schedule to

i

ttI!t,

~ I

) I \ t

, l 1

1 1

f I

~ I , I 1 ! i I I i I ! I I I f i ! I

I I I I

4

the plaint, the land described in the 2nd schedule to the Answer of the

Defendant and the land disputed in the Primary court case are one and the

same.

It must be noted Section 41 of the Civil Procedure Code refer to an action

in respect of a specific portion of land i.e if a specific portion of a (larger) land is

in dispute. That specific portion must be described in the plaint by reference to

physical metes and bounds or by reference to a specific sketch, map or plan. In

the present case, the land in dispute is not a portion but the whole land bearing

lot No. 769 Yz, which is morefully described in the schedule to the Plaint.

The Plaintiff claims that since the land is a high land and she cultivated it

with banana plants, peanuts and onions. These are uchena" cultivations which

can be done only on a highland. But the Defendant says that it is a paddy land

and he also cultivated banana plants. How it can be done in a paddy land is a

question tht is not explained by him. The evidence of the Plaintiff was

supported by the Grama Nildari who also says that upto 1992, the land was a

high land and after 1992 it was made a paddy land. Nevertheless, it is

abundantly clear from the evidence led in this case that prior to 1992, the land

was possessed by the Plaintiff as a high land and cultivated on it some 'chena'

plantation such as bananas, peanuts onions etc., and only in 1992, the

Defendant has disturbed Plaintiff's possession on the strength of document

marked uV2".

On a perusal of document marked IIV2" , it appears that it had been

issued on 28.11.1991 or on 07.01.1992. although it says that unauthorized

occupation date is 1987, but no evidence is led in the case to prove this position.

5

It is in evidence that on or about 27.10.1992 the Defendant, with the help of

Mahaweli Authorities had gone to the Plaintiff's land and dispossessed her.

After this incident only, the Primary Court case had been instituted and

thereafter the present civil case has been filed by the Plaintiff in the District

Court. The learned District Judge has analysed the evidence of the witnesses

given in this case and states that "the Grama Niladari's evidence corroborates

the evidence of the Plaintiff that she was in possession prior to 27.10.1992 and

the Defendant has failed to contradict this evidence and therefore a cause of

action has accrued to the Plaintiff to regain her possession and to recover

compensation from the Defendant's" (see page 3 of the Judgment). .

The possessory action is not a rei vindicatio action and therefore the

question as to who is the owner is quite irrelevant. It is admitted in this case

that the land in dispute belongs to the Mahaweli Authority and is a reservation

adjoining lot 555, which is allotted to the Plaintiff. In a possessory action the

only matter thtis looked into is whether or not the Plaintiff had possession ut

dominus for a year and a day in terms of Section 4 of the Prescription

Ordinance. Hence, the Plaintiff need not set out a title as in the case of rei

vindicatio action. (see Abdul Aziz vs Abdul Rahim (1909) 12 NlR 330.

It is clear that prior to 27.10.1992, the Plaintiff was in peaceful possession

of the land in dispute until she was disturbed

In the case of Perera vs Wijesuriya 59 NlR 529. It was held that the

trespass without ouster may, in appropriate circumstances, amount to

dispossession within the meaning of Section 4 of the Prescription Ordinance.

fI

i

~t

[

~

I!ll

, I

1

\

l 1 I I

<l I I ! I ) , , 1 I

I

6

In a possessory action like the present case, the Plaintiff has to prove two

ingredients (1) she was in possession of the land in dispute and (2) she was

dispossessed by the Defendant otherwise than by process of law. In this case,

both these elements are well established by the Plaintiff. The Plaintiff. having

been in possession of the land for over a year and a day prior to 27.10.1992 is

entitled to maintain a possessory action in terms of the law.

I wish to mention here that the Primary Court has made an initial mistake

by placing the Defendant in possession of the land on the strength of the

document marked IIV2". It is not a matter for the Primary Court to decide on

title but purely to prevent breach of the peace between the parties over a land

dispute. If the Plaintiff had been in possession of the land over several years and

especially within two months of the Report filed by the Police, the court should

have allowed the party in possession to continue in possession and order the

disputing party to file a civil action. The Primary Court instead of ordering the

defendant to institute civil action on the document V2 had placed him in

possession and directed the Plaintiff to seek civil remedy. This is in violation of

the provisions of the Primary Court Procedure Act. The Defendant should have

been referred to a civil action to prove his title by the document marked V2

issued to him by the Mahaweli Authorities in 1991.

Considering the facts, the law and the evidence led in this case, the

Plaintiff has morefully identified the land in dispute which she possessed since

1970. Her possession had been disturbed on 27.10.1992 only after the

Defendant was issued with the document V2 by the Mahaweli Authorities. The

Plaintiff has proved that she had been in possession of the land prior to

1 j 1 I

1 i

\

I ) I

I i

7

27.10.1992 and was dispossessed on this date by the Defendant. This case has

been filed on 27.09.1993 which is within one year of the dispossession of the

Plaintiff. In all respect the Plaintiff has a right to bring this action in terms of

Section 4 of the Prescription Ordinance.

For the above said reasons, I am not inclined to interfere with the

judgment of the learned Additional District Judge. I affirm the judgment of the

District Court and dismiss the appeal with costs.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Deepali Wijesundera J.,

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL