IN THE COUI,.T OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

I SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Case No.892/1997 (F)

Ingrid Shriyani ~elum Kumari de Silva

of Magallegama, Nikaweratiya.

PLAINTIFF

D.C. Mahawa Case No.35?O/L ~Vs~

BEFORE

Lamahewage Susila Kusumawathie

of Rest House R~lad, Nikaweratiya.

DEFENDANT

AND NOW BE 1 WEEN

Lamahewage Susila Kusumawathie

of Rest House Ruad, Nika\veratiya.

DEFENDANT ,. APPELLANT

~Vs~

Ingrid Shriyani ,~elum Kumari de Silva

of Magallegama, Nikaweratiya.

PLAINTIFF ~ RESPONDENT

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,J.

1

COUNSEL

Decided on

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

Dr. Sunil Coorayfor the with A.W. Diana Stephnit Rodrigo for the Defendant~ Appellant

Rohan Sahabandu, PC for the Plaintiff~ Respondent

18.07.2018

The Plaintiff~ Respondent (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "the Plaintiff") filed this

case in the District Court of Mahawa stating inter alia that:

1. By Deed No. 11746 dated 11.10.1955 the plaintiff's predecessor in title (one

Catherine de Silva) bought for lawful money the land described in the schedule

to the plaint.

Il. The said Catherine de Silva and her husband built a house in the said land and

such house was their "Maha Gedera".

Ill. Catherine de Silva transferred all the rights in the said land to the Plaintiff by

Deed No. 2646 dated 03.03.1980 attested by Kamala Menike Karunathileke

Notary Public.

iv. Thereafter the Plaintiff mortgaged the said land to the Defendant by Deed of

Transfer bearing No. 34371 dated 31.12.1981 fo~' Rs.6,000/~.

v. The Plaintiff agreed with the Defendant to pay the said sum of Rs.6,000/~

within one year and that for one year the Plaintiff is entitled to possess the land

and for the saicl one year a lease agreement bearing No. 34372 attested by the

same Notary was executed.

VI. The Defendant had filed a case In the same District Court bearing No.

1988/Land maliciously to eject the Plaintiff from the property described in the

schedule to the plaint.

VII. The Plaintiff also averred Laesio Enormis.

2

The Plaintiff prayed that Deed of Transfer bearing No. 34371 dated 31.12.1981 be declared

null and void and for costs.

The Defendant filed answer and stated that the Plaintiff sold or transferred her rights in

the land in dispute by Deed of Transfer bearing No. 34371 and stated that it is not a Deed

of ~10rtgage and even thE' intention of the Defendant "vas to transfer all the rights in the

said land. The Defendant also stated that the Defendant already filed a case bearing No.

1899/L and that such cas~.' has already been decided against the Plaintiff in this case and

in favour of the Defendant in this case.

Both parties admitted that paragraph 2 of the plaint, a~.1d admitted both Deed nos. 34371

and 34372 dated 31.12.1981-~~Nas executed.

The case proceeded to trial on the following issues:

Plaintiff

1. On 31.12.1981 w~len Deed No. 34371 was executed is the amount appearing on

the face of the Deed more than double the actual value as at 31.12.29817

ii. If the above iss'.le is answered in the affirmadve has given loss been caused to

the Plaintiff?

iii. If the pt issue or the 2nd issue is answered in favour of the Plaintiff then can

Deed No. 34371 dated 31.12.1981 attested by Karunathileke Notary Public be

declared null and void?

Defendant

IV. Is Deed No. 34371 a Deed of Transfer?

v. If so can the Plaintiff maintain this action under the Law?

VI. Is Plaintiff's action prescribed?

VII. If so can the Plaintiff maintain this action?

It is axiomatic that a deed can never be declared null and void on the principle of laesio

enormis. If that principle applies, all that can be done is for the Court to give to the , transferee on the deed in question (namely the Defendant) the choice of either keeping

3

the property by paying the. difference in value to the transferor (namely the Plaintiff), or

returning the property after accepting the return of the purchase price which was paid

on the deed. Therefore, to begin with, as a fundamental matter of law, the issues of the

Plaintiff are incorrect.

On behalf of the Plaintif, the Plaintiff herself gave evidence, and the Surveyor who was

issued with a commission also gave evidence and the Plaintiff's case was closed with the

marking in evidence of documents as PI to P4.

On behalf of the Defendant, the Defendant only gave evidence and closed the case

marking in evidence two documents as VI and V2.

The Plaintiff in proving her case of Lcisio Enormis called the Surveyor, but it is clear that

the commission was taken out only in the year 1994 which is approximately more than 10

years after the deed and t he valuation has been prepared ex parte. The said valuation has

been prepared in 1994 and'not in 1981 which is the relevant year in which the purported

Deed was written. Accordingly there is no evidence of the value of the land in the year

1981 or within a reasonable time period. Therefore the Plaintiff has not established her

case with respect to Laesio Enormis. Whereas the Plaintiff had conceded the then market

price of the land in dispute and only pointed out the market price in 1994.

The Plaintiff's prayer is centered around the Transfer Deed No.3471. If it is to be null and

void as it is prayed for, 'it is questionable as to the execution of the lease agreement

No.34372 of 31.12.l981. W.ill a person execute a lease agreement for a premises owned by

herself? This clearly indicates Plaintiff's intention to transfer the property described in

the schedule to the plaint to the Defendant and it had not been a collateral for a mortgage

as stated in the paragraph 7 of the plaint. Further the Defendant had allowed the Plaintiff

to stay at the same prembes until they found a house for themselves.

In the judgment delivered by the Mahawa District Judge-, there is an erroneous decision on

the facts pertaining to the Deed No.3471. In other words the deed is being categorized

as a mortgage bond. However if it is the stand of the learned District Judge, still the

4

action instituted will be time bared. As the plaint say; in paragraph 7 that it was to be

paid off within a year, then that time will begin to run from from 31.12.1982 according to

the judgment given by the, then learned District Judge of Mahawa. The Plaintiff had

instituted the action in th~ year 1992. This clearly shows that the action is out of time

going by the Section 10 of the Prescription Ordinance. Further the possession was

continuing on the part c;f the Plaintiff under the lease agreement No.3472. Therefore

Defendant has a right to rely upon the law of prescription despite of the explanation

given in the impugned judgment.

Section 5 of the Prescription Ordinance makes mortgage debt or bond prescribed in 10

years and Section 6 mak~~, any action invalid on any::::ontract bargain or agreement or

other written security other than the instruments b:i Section 5 (i.e., mortgage debt or

bond) unless such action is brought within 6 years from the date of the breach of such

partnership deed or such written promise contract bargain or agreement" or other

written security. Section 7 also brings the documents in the same ambit and they get

prescribed in 6 years. Therefore even if it is accepted by the learned District Judge that

the Deed No.3471 is a mOl'tgage bond, the cause of action is prescribed within 10 years.

Even if it is any other wrilVn agreement the Plaintiff needs to reach courts in 6 years. She

~las taken more than 10 years to institute action. This clearly proves the time bar to

institute such legal action.

Further, the action instituted Case No.1899/L by the Defendant of this case, who is the

Plaintiff of that case, had submitted facts so as to state that the PlaintifrRespondent is

an over holding lessee. Thereby the case is decided in favour of the Defendant of this case

i.e., the Plaintiff of the 1899(L case.

On the point of prescription raised by the Defendant with respect to the plaintif~'s case is

clear that the Plaintiff knew very well of the Deed 34381 executed on 31.12.1981. The case

was filed on 26.06.1992. Section 10 of the Prescription Ordinance states that in order to

declare a Deed null and void such action should be filed within three years from the date

5

of the Deed. Therefore it j~i3 quite patent that the actiun of the Plaintiff is clearly out of

time.

I I. ~ a. 78 N.LR page 2500-declaration that a notarially executed deed is null arid void is

prescribed within) years of the date of the execution of the deed-Section 10 of the

Prescription Ordinance:-

"An action for declaration that a notarially executed deed is null and void is prescribed within 3

years of the date of the execution of the deed in terms of Section 10 of the Prescription ordinance."

Section 44 of the Civil Pr~)Cedure Code lays down the following rule which is absolutely

mandatory where the action arose beyond the legal time period.

"If the cause of action arose beyond the period ordinarily allowed by any law for

instituting the action, the plaint must show the ground upon which exemption from

such law is claimed."

I . However there is no sooh exemption sought in the plaint. Therefore there lies an

impediment to the institution of this action and its continuation.

In the circumstances the action of the Plaintiff is time barred under Section 10 of the

Prescription Ordinance and as the Plaintiff has failed tu prove her case on Laesio Enormis I

?et aside the judgment dated 01.09.1997 and proceed to allow this appeal.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

6