IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Revision Application No: CA (PH C) APN 115/2018

H.C. Colombo Case No: HC/4682/2009

In the matter of an application for Revision in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka read with section 404 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979.

Hon. Attorney General, Attorney-General's Department, Colombo 12. Complainant

Vs.

Sunil Sumanawansha Amarathunga, No. 84, Buthgamuwa Road, Kalapaluwawa, Rajagiriya. Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Sunil Sumanawansha Amarathunga, No. 84, Buthgamuwa Road, Kalapaluwawa, Rajagiriya. Accused-Petitioner

Vs.

Page 1 of 8

BEFORE

COUNSEL

INQUIRY ON

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

DECIDED ON

K.K.WICKREMASINGHE, J.

Hon. Attorney General, Attorney -General's Department, Colombo 12. Complainant-Respondent

K. K. Wickremasinghe, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Palitha Fernando, PC with AAL Yajish Tennakoon and AAL Dilip Prasad for the Accused-Petitioner

Nayomi Wickremasekara, SSC for the Complainant-Respondent

16.01.2019

The Accused-Petitioner - On 23.01.2019

26.02.2019

The Accused-Petitioner has filed this revision application seeking to revise the

order of the Learned High Court Judge of Colombo dated 17.09.2018 in Case No:

HC/4682/2009, refusing to release the accused-petitioner on bail, pending an

appeal.

Facts of the case:

The accused-petitioner (hereinafter referred to as the 'petitioner') was listed as

witness no. 02 for the prosecution in case No. HC/4682/2009. The petitioner was

treated as an adverse witness by the prosecution under section 154 of the Evidence

Page 2 of 8

Ordinance. At the conclusion of the trial, the Learned High Court Judge acted in

terms of section 449(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act and summarily

convicted the petitioner on two counts of perjury. Accordingly the petitioner was

sentenced for a term of 1 year rigorous imprisonment for each count and was

imposed a fine of Rs. 1000/= with a default term of 4 months rigorous

imprisonment. The Learned High Court Judge further directed the terms of

imprisonment to run consecutively. Thereafter an application for bail, pending

appeal, was made on behalf of the petitioner which was refused by the Learned

High Court Judge on 17.09.2018.

Being aggrieved by the said refusal, the petitioner preferred this reVISIOn

application.

The Learned State Counsel for the complainant-respondent (hereinafter referred to

as the 'respondent') raised a preliminary objection that the petitioner has not

demonstrated any exceptional circumstances to invoke the revisionary jurisdiction

of this Court.

In the case of Attorney General V. Ediriweera [S.C. Appeal No. 100/2005]

(2006 B.L.R. 12), it was held that,

"The norm is that bail after conviction is not a matter of right but would be

granted only under exceptional circumstances. "

In the case of Attorney General V. Letchchemi & another [S.C. Appeal

13/2006] (2006 B.L.R. 16), it was held that,

"The presumption of innocence that insures in favour of those suspected or

accused or connected with the commission of an offence, ceases to operate

after conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction. "

Page 3 of 8

In light of above it is understood that law, as it stands today, requires a convicted

person to demonstrate the existence of exceptional circumstances in order to get

released on bail pending appeal. However ill the case of Ramu

Thamotharampillai V. Attorney General [2004] 3 Sri L.R. 180, it was held that,

" ... This court is vested with a wide discretion to grant or refuse bail by

section 325(3) with which we are now concerned. But this discretion must

be exercised judiciously and not arbitrarily or capriciously. In Queen v

Liyanage(6) the Court pointed out at page 291 "Even if our discretion

to grant bail is unfettered it must still be judiciously exercised. " But it

pointed out at pages 292 and 293 "But it is not to be thought that the grant

of bail should be the rule and the refusal of bail should be the exception

where serious non-bailable offences of this sort are concerned. "

Where a statute vests discretion in a court it is of course unwise to

confine its exercise within narrow limits by rigid and inflexible rules

from which a court is never at liberty to depart. Nor indeed can there be

found any absolutes or formula which would invariably give an answer

to different problems which may be posed in different cases on

different facts. The decision must in each case depend on its own peculiar

facts and circumstances. But in order that like cases may be decided alike

and that there will be ensured some uniformity of decisions it is necessary

that some guidance should be laid down for the exercise of that discretion. "

(Emphasis added)

Justice Gunasekara followed this position in the case of Jayanthi Silva and two

others V. Attorney General [1997] 3 Sri L.R. 117 in which it was held that,

"In Ramu Thamotheram Pillai v. Attorney-General (Supra) bail was refused

to the Appellant who was convicted of attempted murder and sentenced to

Page 4of8

seven years rigorous imprisonment pending his appeal on the ground that

no exceptional circumstances have been made out.

From a consideration of the decisions referred to above and the legal

provisions as a general principle there is no doubt that exceptional

circumstances must be established by an appellant if the discretion vested

in a High Court to grant him bail pending the determination of his

appeal is to be exercised in his favour. But this by no means should be

taken to be the invariable and inflexible rule for Justice Vaithiyalingam, J

himself recognised it in the case of Thamotheram Pillai v. Attorney-General

(Supra) when he observed thus "But the requirement of exceptional

circumstances should not be mechanically insisted upon merely because

the case is from the High Court. Even in the case of a High Court it is

possible for an appellant to have been convicted of a trivial offence

and to have been given a very light sentence. For instance a man charged

with murder may ultimately be found guilty of only causing simple hurt and

be sentenced to a short term of imprisonment. In such a case the Court

would not expect the appellant to show that exceptional circumstances

existed before granting bail. " (Emphasis added)

We observe that these two cases were decided under the Administration of Justice

Law and section 333 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act which dealt with the

law of bail prior to the enactment of the Bail Act in 1997.

In the case of Attorney General V. Letchchemi & another (supra) it was further

held that,

"Bail after conviction in the High Court referred to in section 333(3) of the

Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 has been incorporated in

verbatim in Section 20(2) of the Bail Act No.30 of 1997. The settled law on

Page 5 of 8

this is that where a section has been incorporated in verbatim, governing

principles applicable are those contained in the principal enactment. The

interpretation of the principal enactment has always held that there must be

exceptional circumstances.

As section 20 of the Bail Act No. 30 of 1997 is identical to that contained in

the Code of Criminal Procedure, in its implementation the earlier restricted

view of the convicted person having to disclose exceptional circumstances

for grant of bail must prevail ... "

These decisions amply demonstrate that even though a petitioner is required to

demonstrate exceptional circumstances in an application for bail pending appeal,

such exceptional circumstances will certainly differ depending on the

circumstances of each case.

The Learned State Counsel was correct in arguing that the age of the petitioner

does not fall within the defmition of the exceptional circumstances. However it is

our considered view that the extreme old age of the petitioner should be considered

together with other circumstances of this case such as the term of imprisonment

and the possibility of the petitioner absconding. Therefore the existence of

exceptional circumstances shall be decided on a consideration of the totality of the

case.

The petitioner is a person of 70 years. The main consideration of the Learned High

Court Judge in refusing the bail application was that the petitioner whilst giving

evidence has been laughing and ridiculing Court. The Learned Counsel for the

petitioner submitted that neither the Learned High Court Judge nor the State

Counsel who made that observation had been present in Court at the time the

petitioner testified and the Learned High Court Judge who observed the petitioner,

Page 6 of 8

giving evidence, had not made such an observation. However upon perusal of the

proceedings, we find that Court has made an observation as to the petitioner was

laughing while giving evidence.

"9: l5)~25f l5)) ~)JG'25f ~IDzm G'ct~zm ~)J z3~CJ?

c,: Z5)oG3 CDIZ5) G'ctJ~ ~)G'25f (8Z5)JIDJG'e:I@25f 8<3i5d~ CQhG'ct8)"

(At page 226 of the brief)

Nevertheless we are of the view that such facts dealing with the conviction should

not be considered in granting bail, pending appeal.

The Learned President's Counsel for the petitioner further contended that

according to prison regulations the 2 years imprisonment would lapse in less than

18 months and his appeal would be rendered nugatory even if it is decided in his

favour. It was further submitted that the petitioner has not yet been informed that

the appeal briefs are ready.

In the aforesaid case of Ediriweera [S.C. Appeal No. 100/2005], it was held that,

"Delay is always a relative term and the question to be considered is not

whether there was mere explicable delay as when there is a backlog of

cases, but whether there has been excessive or oppressive delay and this

always depends on the facts and circumstances of the case ... "

This Court has earlier observed that in the present system of criminal justice we do

not see prolonged delays in preparing appeal briefs as it used to be. However we

are of the view that the time period of preparing the brief should be always

considered compared to the term of imprisonment. Therefore we think that it is

Page 7 of 8

to

quite difficult to conclude hearing an appeal within 18 months given that the

appeal brief of the instant case is not yet ready.

Considering above, we are of the view that the Learned High Court Judge erred in

refusing to release the petitioner on bail pending appeal. Therefore we revise the

order of the Learned High Court Judge dated 17.09.2019 . We order the petitioner

to be released on bail under following conditions;

1. A cash bail ofRs.50, 000/= (Rupees Fifty Thousand)

2. A surety bail of Rs. 100,000/= with two sureties. (Each surety acceptable to

the High Court must enter into a bond which must be of Rs.l 00, 000/= each)

3. The passport and any other travel document of the petitioner must be handed

over to the High Court of Colombo.

Accordingly this revision application is allowed.

Registrar is directed to forward copies of this order to the relevant High Court of

Colombo and to the Controller General, Department of Immigration and

Emigration.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Page 8of8