IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Mohamed Haniffa Irshath,

No. 218,

Arafa Vidyalaya Road,

Addalaichenai 10.

Respondent-Appellant-Appellant

CA CASE NO: CA/LA/03/2018

BOARD OF QUAZIS CASE NO: BQ/A/60/15/Kal

QUAZI COURT OF ADDALAICHENAI CASE NO: 8543/Fasah

Vs.

Abdul Latheef Asmiya,

No. 106/A,

Imraniya Road,

Addalaichenai 1.

Applicant-Respondent-Respondent

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Safana Gul Begum for the Appellant.

Yoosuff Nasar for the Respondent.

Decided on: 11.07.2019

2

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The husband (appellant) filed this appeal with leave obtained

from the Judgment of the Board of Quazis dated 17.03.2018

whereby the Fasah divorce granted by the Quazi Court in favour

of the wife (respondent) was affirmed.

The parties married under the Muslim Marriage and Divorce Act

on 21.06.2012. The appellant went to Qatar on 24.10.2012 and

returned on 17.05.2014. The respondent on or about

26.05.2015 made the application in the Quazi Court seeking a

Fasah divorce under section 28(1) of the said Act inter alia on

the grounds of failure to fulfil conjugal obligations, harassment,

ill-treatment etc. as faults. There are no children out of this

wedlock.

The position taken up by the appellant before the learned Quazi

was that the respondent had applied for Fasah divorce due to

compulsion on the part of her parents and not on her own

volition. He says he committed no fault. Nor does he say that

the respondent committed any fault. He wanted a reconciliation

to be brought about between them and facilitate to continue

with the matrimonial life.1

It is apparent from the proceedings before the Quazi Court and

the Judgment of the Board of Quazis that the learned Quazi has

taken every possible step to bring about a settlement but all his

attempts have ended in vain.

1 Vide the affidavit of the appellant dated 12.08.2015.

3

The respondent has consistently and categorically taken up the

stern position that she is unable to live with the appellant. She

has both verbally and in writing repeatedly informed the learned

Quazi that she would not change her mind.

The Board of Quazis in its Judgment has set out in detail the

attempts made by the learned Quazi for a reconciliation and how

those attempts were unsuccessful.

When the case has been taken up before the Quazi Court on

05.09.2015, the learned Quazi has informed before both parties

that if there was no reconciliation within one month from that

date, Fasah divorce would be granted on the next date.

The next date, which was 03.10.2015, the appellant had been

absent on the ground of illness, but no application for a

postponement has been made.

Hence the learned Quazi, taking all the circumstances into

account, has granted the Fasah divorce.

It is true that neither party has led oral evidence but relied upon

the affidavits tendered by them with written statements in

addition to what has been stated before the learned Quazi. The

learned Quazi has accepted the respondents version.

The learned counsel for the appellant challenges the order of the

Quazi Court which granted the Fasah divorce and the Judgment

of the Board of Quazis which affirmed it, on two grounds. Both

of them relate to the violation of Rules in the Third Schedule to

the Muslim Marriage and Divorce Actto be specific, Rule Nos.

7 and 11.

4

Section 28(1) of the Muslim Marriage and Divorce Act reads as

follows:

Where a wife desires to effect a divorce from her husband,

without his consent, on the ground of ill-treatment or on

account of any act or omission on his part which amounts to

a fault under the Muslim law governing the sect to which

the parties belong, the procedure laid down in the Third

Schedule shall be followed.

Rule 7 of the Third Schedule reads as follows:

The Quazi shall then proceed, in manner prescribed by

regulation made under the Act, to empanel three Muslim

assessors (hereinafter in this Schedule referred to as

Muslim assessors) to assist him in the hearing of the

application:

Provided that in the following cases, and in those cases

only, it shall not be necessary for the Quazi to empanel

Muslim assessors, namely-

(a) Where the Quazi dealing with an application is a

special Quazi appointed under section 14 of the Act; or

(b) Where the area in which an application is to be heard is

an area in respect of which, owing to the sparseness of

the Muslim population or for any other reason, the

Minister has by notification in the gazette given

directions that application for divorce may be heard

without the assistance of Muslim assessors.

5

Rule 11 is to the following effect:

The Quazi shall maintain a record of the proceedings in the

case and shall enter therein the statements made on oath

or affirmation by the wife or her witnesses and by the

husband (if he is present) and his witnesses. Of the wifes

witnesses the number examined shall not be less than two

in any case. The record of every such statement shall be

read over by the Quazi to the person who made it and, after

any necessary corrections have been made therein, shall be

signed by such person. Where such person refuses to sign

such statement, the fact of such refusal shall be recorded

by the Quazi.

It is the contention of the learned counsel for the appellant that,

in terms of Rule 7, although three Muslim Assessors shall be

empaneled by the Quazi to assist him in the hearing of the

application, the Quazi, in this instance, empaneled only two,

which is a violation of the mandatory requirement of law.

Learned counsel for the appellant also says that, in terms of

Rule 11, notwithstanding evidence of at least two witnesses shall

be led by the wife, no evidence of any witness was led before

Fasah divorce was granted in transgression of the said Rule.

Accordingly, the learned counsel strenuously submits that the

violation of those two mandatory procedural requirements

vitiates the grant of divorce and therefore it shall be set aside.

The predominant question to be decided in this appeal is

whether the strict adherence to the Rules of the Third Schedule

6

in the Act to the extreme very letter is mandatory. The Board of

Quazis has taken the view that it is not mandatory. That seems

to be the better view.

It is important to understand that divorce under the Muslim

Marriage and Divorce Act is different from divorce under the

Marriage Registration Ordinance. The procedure, standard of

proof etc. are stricter in the latter than in the former. When a

marriage is contracted under the Marriage Registration

Ordinance, divorce can only be granted by a District Judge (who

is a trained judicial officer having a vast judicial experience) on

limited specific grounds. But under the Muslim Marriage and

Divorce Act, no such strict specific grounds have been laid

down, and divorce is granted by a Quazi, who is a layman.

When similar objections were taken in appeal upon Fasah

divorce being granted in Deen v. Rauff [1997] 2 Sri LR 253,

Justice Ismail did not think that the failure to hold the inquiry

in conformity with the Rules vitiated the Quazis decision. In

that case, as seen from page 257 of the Judgment, Learned

counsel for the appellant-petitioner [has] referred in particular to

the failure of the Quazi to empanel the assessors in the manner

prescribed by the regulations, the failure to administer the oaths

to them before they commenced their functions, the failure of the

witnesses to give evidence on oath or affirmation and the failure

to obtain the opinions of the assessors on the points arising for

adjudication. Justice Ismail at page 258 has held that The

learned Quazi has clearly erred in failing to hold the inquiry in

conformity with the rules as prescribed in the Third Schedule to

the Act, but did not think it fit to set aside the order of the

7

Board of Quazis which affirmed the order of the Quazi by which

Fasah divorce was granted on the basis that there was sufficient

evidence to grant Fasah divorce in favour of the wife.

In the instant case, admittedly, two assessors have assisted the

Quazi in hearing the application. As seen from the proceedings

of the Quazi Court dated 05.09.2015, the two assessorseach

from one partyhave informed the Quazi the impossibility of a

reconciliation. The two assessors have signed the case record.

The insistence of leading evidence of two witnesses is salutary,

but may not be mandatory. What matters is not the number of

witnesses called, but whose versionhusband or wifeis more

probable or acceptable than the other. Evidence shall be

weighed not counted.

In this case, as I stated earlier, the only plea of the appellant

before the Quazi was to reconcile them in order to continue with

their matrimonial life. This plea is no more valid, according to

the appellants own showing, because, soon after the Fasah

divorce was granted, pending appeal, the respondent has

contracted another marriage. The appellant has filed a private

plaint in the Magistrates Court against the respondent for

bigamy, which is a criminal charge attracting jail sentence. In

that backdrop it is abundantly clear that reconciliation is an

impossibility. The marriage is irretrievably broken down. There

is no flint of hope for reunion. With due regard to the sanctity of

marriage, there is hardly any reason why the marriage tie, in the

said circumstances, should continue.

8

In the unique facts and circumstances of this case, there is no

compelling need to interfere with the Judgment of the Board of

Quazis.

I dismiss the appeal but without costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal