==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Orders in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus

under Article 140 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

1. H.M. Thilakaratne,

"Dharmasiri", Dodamgaswatta, Aththalapitiya, Bandarawela.

2. S.N.P. Wimalaratne,

"Madhura Niwasa", Kudagoda, Udaperuwa, Kinigama, Bandarawela. CA (Writ) App. No. 749/2023

3. W.M. Jayathilaka,

"Tharanga Niwasa", Heel oya, Bandarawela.

4. J.P. Dickson Silva,

Heraliya Gaskumbura, North Kebillawela, Bandarawela.

5. K.A. Podiralahami

Kahaththewela, Welimada Road, Bandarawela.

6. J.M. Jathisinghe

Kumara Niwasa, Liyangahawela.

7. W.D. Namal Piyaratne,

"Senasuma", Piyarapandowa.

PETITIONERS Vs.

2

1. Mr. H.P.A.G. Anuruddha,

Provincial Commissioner of Co-operative Development and Registrar of Co-operative Societies - Uva Province,

2. Mr. T.M. Samarakoon,

Assistant Provincial Commissioner of Co-operative Development - Uva Province,

3. Mr. M.T.M. Naleem,

Assistant Commissioner of Co-operative Development - Badulla,

4. Mr. K. Kannan,

Co-operative Development Officer,

5. Ms. D.M. Darshani Nilmini

Dissanayake, Co-operative Development Officer,

6. Ms. P.A.U.I. Perera,

Co-operative Development Officer,

7. Mr. R.M. Saman Bandara,

Co-operative Development Officer,

8. Ms. P.M.K. Weerasinghe,

Co-operative Development Officer,

9. H.M. Sanduni Sasangika Herath,

Co-operative Development Officer,

10. Mr. J.B. Priyantha Dissanayaka,

Assistant Commissioner of Co-operative Development,

11. Mr. P. Manjula Jayasiri,

Co-operative Development District Officer (Cover-up duties),

12. Mr. N.A.B. Munidasa,

3

1st to 12th Respondents of; Department of Co-operative Development - Uva Province, No. 199, Keppetipola Road, Badulla.

13. Mr. A.Z.M. Muzzamil,

Hon. Governor of Uva Province,

14. Ms. R.H.C. Priyanthi,

Secretary to the Hon. Governor - Uva Province,

The 13th and 14th Respondents both of; Governor's Office, Raja Weediya, Badulla.

15. Bandarawela Multi-purpose Co-

operative Society Ltd.,

16. Mr. R.M. Premasiri,

General Secretary, Bandarawela Multi-purpose Co-operative Society Ltd.,

17. Ms. Lakshmi Dhammika,

General Manager, Bandarawela Multi-purpose Co-operative Society Ltd.,

The 15th to 17th Respondents of; Bandarawela Multi-purpose Co-operative Society Ltd., No. 04, Perera Mawatha, Bandarawela.

RESPONDENTS

Before: Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

4

Counsel:

Saliya Pieris, P.C., with Anjana Ratnasiri and Thilini Rankoth for the Petitioners.

Mihiri de Alwis, S.S.C. for the 01st to 14th Respondents.

Sapumal Bandara with Lakshith Edirisinghe instructed by Amanda De Moore for the

15th to 17th Respondents.

Argued on: 08.12.2025

Delivered on: 23.07.2026

5

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Judgement

Introduction

The Petitioners are members of the Bandarawela Cooperative Society, and their membership has

been suspended pending inquiry. Being aggrieved by the said suspension, the Petitioners sought

to invoke the writ jurisdiction of this Court. Initially, this Court issued formal notice, and after

objections were filed, this matter was argued before me on 08.12.2025. The following arguments

were advanced at the hearing; hence, this judgement.

Arguments

The first contention advanced by Mr. Saliya Peiris, P.C., is that the Respondents, by suspending

the membership without holding an inquiry or even recording a statement from the Petitioners,

have violated the rules of natural justice, and therefore, such suspension is illegal.

On the other hand, Mr. Lakshith Edirisinghe (junior counsel to Mr. Sapumal Bandara) contended

that the suspension is justified in view of Section 54(3) of the by-laws of the statute published by

the Provincial Council, which is marked and annexed to the Petition as P1(b). Further, he argued

that P14 indicates the reason for the suspension, namely that the Petitioners may have tampered

with evidence and interfered with witnesses.

The second argument of Mr. Lakshith Edirisinghe is that since the inquiry is now over, this

Application is merely of academic interest.

6

Additionally, Ms. Mihiri de Alwis, S.S.C., argued that the main inquiry has concluded. As such,

the Petitioners cannot maintain this Application now, since their membership has already been

suspended for five years.

The Petitioners’ position

The 15th Respondent is the Bandarawela Multi-purpose Co-operative Society Limited (hereinafter

referred to as “the Co-operative Society”) of which the 1st Petitioner is the Chairman whilst the 2nd

Petitioner is the Vice Chairman of the said Co-operative Society.

According to the Petition, the 15th Respondent had been established since 1991, and the

administrative decisions of the Co-operative Society is taken by the Board of Directors, elected in

terms of the by-laws of the Co-operative Society; the said by-laws are marked and annexed to the

Petition as P2. The Petitioners state that the 1st Petitioner has served in the Board of Directors of

the Co-operative Society for 29 years, and for the last 20 years, he has functioned as the elected

chairman of the Co-operative Society. The said 15th Respondent Society has more than Forty-

Three Thousand members and One Hundred and Sixty (160) employees under it; to establish this,

the management report is marked and annexed to the Petition as P3.

The Petitioners state that they have been elected to the Board of Directors of the Co-operative

Society for a period of three (03) years by majority vote at the Annual General Meeting held on

18.09.2022 by eighty-seven delegates who participated at the said meeting, of which, the 1st

Petitioner was elected to the Board of Director by majority vote of eighty votes; to establish this,

they have annexed the document marked as P4 to the Petition.

7

In addition to that, the Petitioners claim that during their management from 01st January 2023 up

until 30th September 2023, the Co-operative Society had secured a profit of Rs. 38,782,180/-

(Thirty-Eight Million Seven Hundred and Eighty-Two Thousand One Hundred and Eighty

Rupees), and to establish that, the financial report on the profit is marked as P5 annexed to the

Petition.

Further, the Petitioners claim that the Co-operative Society’s affairs have regularly been audited

as well. The Petitioners assert that during their tenure, they have taken actions according to the

audit reports so obtained.

The Petitioners allege that certain political party had also pooled their own six members for the

election that was held in September 2023, who were defeated; Nevertheless, they have instigated

a fictious Society called “Purawasi Sabhawa” to send petitions against the management of the Co-

operative Society to the Governor of the Uva Province. Accordingly, the Governor has caused an

audit, and the report of it is marked as P7; according to the Petitioners’ claim, nothing has been

found against the Petitioners in the said report.

Nevertheless, the Department of the Co-operative Development of Uva Province has appointed a

committee to inspect the affairs of the Co-operative Society. Accordingly, the 3rd to 9th

Respondents were appointed as members of the said committee, and the Petitioners assert that they

have assisted the proceedings of the said committee and whenever they had asked for information,

the Petitioners have furnished and submitted information and documents to them accordingly, or

they caused to submit them accordingly; to establish that, the Petitioners have marked the

documents annexed to the Petition as P8 to P30.

8

The Petitioners allege that, without recording any statement from the Petitioners or any other

member of the Board of Directors, by letter dated 23.10.2023 marked as P14, the said committee

has suspended the Board of Directors and recommended to the 1st Respondent to appoint a

management committee.

Thereafter, the Petitioners have been charge-sheeted and pending the inquiry by the documents

marked as P20 and P21, an Interim Management Committee has been appointed.

Accordingly, the Petitioners challenge the suspension of the Board of Directors by P14, and the

appointment of the Interim Management Committee by P20 and P21 by this Application.

The Respondents’ Objections

The 1st to 14th Respondents have filed their Statement of Objections separately, while the 15th to

17th Respondents have filed a separate Statement of Objections.

It is the position of the 1st to 14th Respondents that the Petitioners and other members of the Board

of Directors were called to give explanations by the letters marked as R1 dated 02.04.2024 and by

R2 dated 08.04.2024; however, the Petitioners avoided giving any statement to the inspection

panel by stating that this instant Application is pending before this Court.

Further, it is stated that the suspension of the Petitioners were effected by P14 for the simple reason

that they would destroy evidence against them or fabricate evidence in their favour. Additionally,

there are serious allegations of mismanagement and financial misconduct, the said suspension was

necessary.

9

It is the position of the 15th to 17th Respondents that the Petitioners and other members of the Board

of Directors were informed by letters marked as R1a to R1b dated 28.02.2024, R1c to R1g dated

04.03.2024 to make statements; however, it is their position that they had avoided making

statements and informed by letters marked as R2a to R2g dated 09.03.2024, that this instant

Application is pending before this Court. Even thereafter when no stay order was issued after

Supporting this Application, they were asked to make a statement, which they also avoided on the

same basis. To establish this, they have annexed the documents marked as R3a to R3g dated

19.03.2024.

Further, it is their position that unless they were suspended from functioning as members of the

Board of Directors, there would have been a continuation of financial misconduct and

mismanagement of the Co-operative Society, and the 15th to 17th Respondents have further denied

any financial gain or profit gained during their management.

Therefore, both sets of Respondents have sought the dismissal of this Application.

However, by way of Counter Affidavits, the Petitioners have informed that when the Petitioners

and the other members of the Director Board were asked to give statements, they had informed the

committee members that they were unable to do so due to the pendency of the case. As such

statements would prejudice their rights.

Further, they avert that they were suspended for six months, and even after the inquiry was

concluded against them, still the suspension operated; therefore, the suspension should be removed.

10

Issues to be considered

In view of the matters asserted in the Petition, denial of allegations contained in the Statements of

Objections filed by the two sets of Respondents, the matters asserted in the Counter Affidavits,

and arguments advanced orally, the following matters arise for my consideration;

(i) Whether the Petitioners have been suspended from functioning as members of the Co-

operative Society by P14, pending the inquiry without even calling for explanations or

recording statements

(ii) If so, have the Respondents, particularly the 3rd to 9th Respondents, violated the rules of

natural justice, or was there impropriety of procedure adopted in making P14 and

recommending to the 1st Respondent to make an interim management committee

(iii)Whether the appointment of the Interim Management Committee by P20 and P21 after

suspension of the Petitioners and pursuant to the recommendation in P14, affected the

rights of the Petitioners and whether it was done following improper procedure

Impropriety of Procedure followed and Violation of Rules of Natural Justice

In this case, as I mentioned above, the first issue that has to be considered is whether the 3rd to 9th

Respondents have followed the correct procedure in effecting the suspension of the Petitioners and

the other members of the Director Board whilst recommending the appointment of the Interim

Management Committee to carry on the business of the same Co-operative Society by P14.

It is an undisputed fact that there was an inspection directed by the 1st Respondent at the instance

of the Governor, since there were allegations of financial malpractice and mismanagement of the

Society; and pursuant to the said inspection by the 3rd to 9th Respondents, certain information had

11

been called for, from the Petitioners. The Petitioners, according to their own documents annexed

along with the Petition, have submitted everything that the Committee had asked for; in fact,

certain information and documents which they did not have were caused to be submitted to the

inspection panel. Thus, they apparently appear to have assisted the inspection conducted by the 3rd

to 9th Respondent, which the facts are not controverted by the Respondents as well. Therefore,

those facts remain s proven facts.1

Nevertheless, it appears that they have not recorded any statements from the 1st to 2nd Petitioners

or any members of the Director Board. In addition to that, they have not called for any explanations

from them either. Despite that, they have suddenly taken the decision to suspend them for six

months by P14 and have recommended to appoint an interim management committee.

Consequently, they have not even charge-sheeted when the suspension was imposed by P14.

Therefore, it is very clear that there is clear case of violation of the rules of natural justice since

without even calling for explanations or recording a statement from the Petitioners, they have been

suspended. In addition to that, there is a clear case of adoption of improper procedure. Thus, the

suspension itself has vitiated the procedure without following those first principles.

Secondly, recommending the appointment of an interim management committee to carry on its

operations is pursuant to the said suspension; as such, this too is also arbitrarily done and

improperly done.2

1 Edrick De Silva v. Chandradasa De Silva (1968) 70 NLR 169. 2 Council of Civil Service Unions and Others v. Minister for the Civil Service (GCHQ case) [1984] 1 A.C. 374.

12

As such, it is my view that only certain writs that have been sought by the Petitioners lie in this

Application.

Conclusion

For the reasons adumbrated above, I wish to grant the relevant prayers prayed for in the Petition

in a modified form. Accordingly, I issue Writ of Certiorari quashing P14, P20, and P21. Thus, the

need for interim orders for the issuance of Writ of Prohibition will not arise, except only a Writ of

Certiorari.

However, this judgement should not affect any decision taken after inspection or any other inquiry

which has been conducted against the Petitioner regarding their financial malpractice,

misappropriation, and mismanagement of the society, and the relevant authorities, including the

Respondents, may take decisions based on such reports.

Accordingly, the Application is allowed, subject to the modification, without costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL