, IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRAIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Court of appeal case no. CAlPHCI APN/63/20 15

H.C. Gampaha case no. 121114

M.C. Mahara case no BR979/13

Naggarathnam Nagalechchimi Alias

Rajeshwari,

162/585/ A, Kimbulaela, Madampitiya

Road, Colombo 15.

Accused Petitioner

Vs.

1. Officer in Charge,

Police Narcotic Bureau, Colombo 01.

2. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney's Department, Colombo 12.

Respondents.

Before : P.R.Walgama J.

: L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

Counsel : Tenny Fernando for the Petitioner.

: Himali J ayanetti SC for the Respondenst.

Argued on : 08.03.2016

Written submissions filed on 03.05.2016 and 30.06.2016

Decided on : 07.09.2016

L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

1

This is an application to revise the order of the Learned High Court

Judge of Gampaha refusing bail. The 2nd Accused Petitioner (the Petitioner)

is indicted for an offence of aiding and abetting to traffic 144 grams of

,

t

2

Heroin, punishable under section 54 of the Poison Opium and the

Dangerous Drugs Ordinance. Several applications were made before the

High Court for bail and all of them were rejected. This application is to

review the order of the Learned High Court Judge dated 20.05.2015

The Petitioner based her application on several grounds. The

Petitioner's contention is that the long period of incarceration, having a

child of 14 years of age, denial of a fair trial by keeping her in remand

together constitutes exceptional circumstances. She further argues that the

fundamental right of the presumption of innocence guaranteed by the

Constitution is violated by remanding her. The learned SSC objected to this

application.

The refusal of an application for bail is a final order within the

meaning of the Criminal Procedure Code. It has been observed by Eric

Basnayake J. in the case of Cader (On behalf of Rasheed Kahan) Officer In

Charge Narcotic Bureau [2006] 3Sri L R 74 that "the orders refusing to

grant bail are considered as final orders which appeals lie." The

Petitioner, as of a right, would have appealed against the order of the

Learned High Court Judge, but have opted to petition this Court to invoke

the revisionary jurisdiction, which is a discretionary remedy of Court,

instead of exercising his right of appeal.

The revisionary power of this Court is very wide and the Court is not

precluded from exercising revisionary jurisdiction even if the alternative

remedy of appeal is available; if exceptional circu'mstances warrant the

intervention of Court. Revision is basically a discretionary remedy. The one,

who moves Court to exercise this discretionary remedy, must aver and

establish that there are exceptional circumstances for the Court to intervene.

It has been held in the case of Rustem v. Hapangama [1978-79-80] Sri L R

352 that;

I

tI I !

t f

!

~ f [I

frI

~

~ 1 I I 1 i i j

,

f

3

The trend of authority clearly indicates that where the revisionary

powers of the Court of Appeal are invoked the practice has been that

these powers will be exercised if there is an alternative remedy

available, only if the existence of special circumstances are urged

necessitating the indulgence of this Court to exercise its powers in

revision.

The appellant has not indicated to Court that any special

circumstances exist which would invite this Court to exercise its

powers of revision, particularly since the appellant had not availed

himself of the right of appeal under section 754(2) which was

available to him.

The Petitioner' argument that a long period of incarceration can be

considered as an exceptional circumstance cannot be applied to a case under

this Ordinance. Section 83 of the Ordinance made it mandatory to keep an

accused person or a person suspected for an offence of this nature in remand

custody until the conclusion of the case unless there are exceptional

circumstances to release on bail. Therefore, long period of remanding does

not contribute to constitute exceptional circumstances. It does not deny a

fair trial too. The Attorneys At Law are permitted to meet their clients in the

remand prison. Even in the present case, the Petitioner was represented by

lawyers of his choice. Therefore, remanding a person does not deny a fair

trial.

The Constitution guarantees the presumption of innocence. Article

13(5) provides that;

(5) Every person shall be presumed innocent until he is proved guilty:

Provided that the burden of proving particular facts may, by law, be

placed on an accused person.

f

4

This presumption applies at the trial stage. The prosecution has to

prove the guilt of the accused person beyond the reasonable doubt; a person

cannot be released on bail on that presumption. The Constitution itself

provide for remanding a person until conclusion of the trial. Article 13(4)

provides that remanding a person is not a punishment.

(4) No person shall be punished with death or imprisonment except

by order of a competent court, made in accordance with procedure

established by law. The arrest, holding in custody, detention or other

deprivation of personal liberty of a person, pending investigation or

trial, shall not constitute punishment.

The fundamental right of liberty is guaranteed under Article 13(1) of

the Constitution which reads;

No person shall be arrested except according to procedure

established by law. Any person arrested shall be informed of the

reason for his arrest.

This is also subject to laws prevailing in the country. Article 15(7)

reads thus;

(7) The exercise and operation of all the fundamental rights declared

and recognized by Articles 12, 13(1), 13(2) and 14 shall be subject to

such restrictions as may be prescribed by law in the interests of

national security, public order and the protection of public health or

morality, or for the purpose of securing due recognition and respect

for the rights and freedoms of others, or of meeting the just

requirements of the general welfare of a democratic society.

The legislature in its wisdom, enacted that a person accused of or

suspected of a crime of this nature be remanded until the case is concluded.

Under these circumstances, keeping a person in remand until the case is

concluded is not a violation of the presumption of innocence.

r t I I ! 1

-J J I , /;~ I I f ! ' I

5

The other ground urged by the Petitioner is that she is having a 14

year old child. The child is being looked after by the grandmother. This

child is not in tender age where the close attention is necessary. He can

attend to his own things. What is necessary at this age is to guide him. I do

not believe that a person of the Petitioner's caliber: a person having .

previous convictions and pending cases on drug trafficking, again accused

of an offence of same nature committed within the operational period of the

suspended sentence: can guide her son in correct path.

The grounds urged by the Petitioner as exceptional circumstances do

not constitute exceptional circumstances.

The Petitioner was arrested while involved in trafficking a large

amount of Heroin, 144 grams. It is a commercial quantity. She has previous

convictions. The present case is on an offence committed within the

operational period of the suspended sentence. Under these circumstances,

the Petitioner cannot be released on bail unless there are exceptional

circumstances. The Petitioner has not established exceptional circumstances.

The Learned High Court Judge has correctly refused the bail application.

Even this revision application is considered on merits, I do not see any

reason to interfere with the finding of the Learned High Court Judge.

Accordingly, the application dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P.R.Walgama J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal