CA/HCC/137/24

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal No:

CA/HCC/0137/2024 Chammi Reshmier Perera alias

Shammi Reshmier Perera

High Court of Colombo

Case No: HC/7302/2014

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

Complainant-Respondent

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

K. M. G. H. Kulatunga, J.

COUNSEL : Radha M. Kuruwitabandara for the

Appellant.

Anoopa De Silva, DSG with Jehan

Gunasekera, SC for the Respondent.

CA/HCC/137/24

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 03/02/2025

DECIDED ON : 28/02/2025

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted by the Attorney General in the High Court of

Colombo under Sections 54A (b) and 54A (d) of the Poisons, Opium and

Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended by Act No. 13 of 1984 for

Trafficking and being in Possession of 2.6 grams of Heroin (diacetylmorphine)

on 26th April 2013.

Following the trial, the Appellant was found guilty for both counts and the

learned High Court Judge of Colombo has imposed life imprisonment for

both counts on the Appellant on 28/06/2023.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given his consent to argue this matter in his absence. At the hearing,

the Appellant was connected via Zoom platform from prison.

CA/HCC/137/24

3 | P a g e

The following Grounds of Appeal were raised on behalf of the Appellant.

1. The learned Trial Judge has failed to consider the credibility of PW1 in

the prosecution case.

2. The learned Trial Judge has failed to consider material contradictions

and omissions in the evidence.

3. The learned Trial Judge has misdirected himself on law and in

accepting the evidence of PW2 as corroborative evidence and as

material evidence at the trial.

4. The learned Trial Judge has failed to provide the advantage of

reasonable doubt to the defence.

5. The learned Trial Judge has failed to provide the benefit of Section

114(f) of the Evidence Ordinance for the Appellant.

6. The conviction and sentence are bad in law.

In this case the raid was conducted upon an information received by PW1

IP/Priyadharshana while on routine crime prevention duty. The raid team

included four police officers from the Crime Prevention Unit of the Borella

Police Station. All have been named as witnesses in the indictment including

the Government Analyst. The prosecution had called PW1, PW2, PW8, PW9,

PW11, PW13 and closed their case. The Government Analyst Report was

admitted under Section 420 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of

1979. The prosecution marked productions P1-P10.

When the defence was called, the Appellant made a statement from the Dock

and closed the defence case.

Background of the case.

On 26/04/2013 IP/Priyadharshana attached to the Crime Prevention Unit

functioned under Borella Police Station had gone for a routine crime

prevention duty with 04 police officers in a three-wheeler belonging to the

said unit. The team had left the police station around 08:20 a. m. All officers

CA/HCC/137/24

4 | P a g e

were clad in civil dress. Another team of police officers had joined them close

to the Welikada Prison around 16:20 hours.

Upon receiving a tip off PW1 and other stood in ambush on either side of the

Baseline Road, Colombo-09. Whilst the team was preparing for an ambush,

a person fitting the description given by the informant had been spotted

approaching the Baseline Road. When he reached the place where the police

team remained in ambush, PW1 had apprehended the Appellant who tried

to struggle and escape. When the Appellant was searched, PW1 had observed

a pink coloured cellophane bag with something in it in the right pocket of

the shorts he was wearing. PW1 had taken the parcel into his custody and

had inspected the same. The parcel contained some brown coloured

substance. As it reacted for Heroin (Diacetylmorphine) the Appellant was

arrested immediately. The time of arrest was 17:00 hours. Upon reaching the

police station around 00:20 hours, PW1 had weighed the parcel at the police

station. The weight of the substances showed 20.50 grams. After entering

notes, the Appellant and the productions were handed over to reserve police

officer of the Borella Police Station under PR No.166/2013. On the following

day PW1 took the Heroin parcel from the reserve and again weighed the

substance at Sew Gunasekera Pawning Centre in Maradana.

As the appeal grounds raised by the Appellant are inter-related, the grounds

will be considered together in this case.

Probability holds a very important role when it comes to convincing the judge

on a specific point as more the probability of the assumption more will be

chances for the judge to get convinced. Probability, it is of utmost importance

during criminal investigation and is used to assess the significance of various

types of evidence. To accuse someone beyond reasonable doubt it becomes

quintessential to have strong evidence and for the sake of that one has to

make a few assumptions to reach certain conclusions, the possibility of these

assumptions to be true is specifically known as principle of probability in

legal terms.

CA/HCC/137/24

5 | P a g e

In this case, only 04 police officers had conducted the raid. They had set off

from the police station without any specific information. According to PW1

he had received the information while on crime prevention duty. According

to PW1 he had weighed the substance at Sew Gunasekera Pawn Shop using

his personal weighing machine. But he had not given any explanation as to

why he weighed twice.

Although the Appellant was arrested at Baseline Road, Colombo-14, PW1

had not taken any meaningful action to search his house nor had the

common sensical approach to investigate the person from whom he received

the Heroin for sale. This lethargic attitude of the raiding officers will certainly

fail the probability test which certainly favours the Appellants claim.

In the present case upon perusal of the judgment delivered by the trial Judge

it is manifestly clear that the learned High Court Judge had completely

misdirected himself with regard to the admission of the dock statement of an

Accused person in a criminal trial. This has caused great prejudice to the

Appellant and he had been denied a fair trial. The importance of considering

the dock statement had been discussed in several judgments by the Superior

Courts. The relevant portion is re-produced below:

Page 263 of the brief.

pQos; ;eke;a;d ;a;sl+vqf isg m%ldYhla lrka idlaIs ,ndoS we;' pQos; ;eke;a;d tg

osjqreulg $ m%;sdjlg hg;aj idlaIs ,ndoS ke;' pQos; ;eke;a;d yria m%Yakj,g

Ndckh fjka idlaIs ,ndoS ke;' pQos; ;eke;a;df.a idlaIsfha we;s tu W!k;djhka

flfrys wlrKfha wjOdkh fhduq lrka tu idlaIs u; msysgd lghq;= fkdlsrSug ;SrKh

lrkq ,ef' ta fya;=fjka pQos; ;eke;a;df.a idlaIsh neyer lrkq ,ef'

CA/HCC/137/24

6 | P a g e

In Queen v. Buddharakkitha Thero 63 NLR 433 the court held that:

The right of an accused person to make an unsworn statement

from the dock is recognised in our law (King v. Vellayan[10 (1918)

20 N. L. R. 251-at 266.].) That right would be of no value unless

such a statement is treated as evidence on behalf of the accused

subject however to the infirmity which attaches to statements that

are unsworn and have not been tested by cross-examination.

In Queen v. Kularatne 71 NLR 529 the court held that:

We are in respectful agreement and are of the view that such a

statement must be looked upon as evidence subject to the

infirmity that the accused had deliberately refrained from giving

sworn testimony, and the jury must be so informed. But the jury

must also be directed that;

a) If they believe the unsworn statement, it must be acted

upon.

b) If it raised a reasonable doubt in their minds about the case

for the prosecution, the defense must succeed,

c) That it should not be used against another accused.

In this case the learned High Court Judge had wrongly rejected the dock

statement of the Appellant.

The learned Counsel for the Appellant further contended that the learned

High Court Judge had wrongly analyzed the defense evidence which caused

further prejudice to the Appellant. The relevant portion is re-produced below:

CA/HCC/137/24

7 | P a g e

Page 263 of the brief.

yer;a pQos; mdYjh fjkqfjka bosrsm;a lr we;s ;a;sjdplh meyeos,s wdldrhg

meKs,sldr mdYjfha idlaIslrejka yria m%Yakj,g Ndckh lsrSf oS Tjqka fhdackd lr

isg ke;' tg pQos; mdYjh fjkqfjka bosrsm;a lr we;s ;a;sjdplfha taldldrS njla

olakg ke;' tu ldrKdj wlrKfha wjOdkhg fhduqj ;su fufia jd;d lr ;nkq

,ef

As pointed out by the Counsel for the Appellant, the learned Counsel who

defended the Appellant in the trial court had accurately and precisely put up

the defence during the cross examination to the relevant witnesses. But quite

surprisingly, the learned High Court Judge who wrote the judgment had

wrongly arrived at the conclusion that the defence had not put their stance

to the prosecution witnesses. This is an incorrect finding on the part of the

trial judge. This too led to denial of a fair trial to the Appellant.

The Appellants have a right to a fair trial to determine whether they are

innocent or guilty which is an internationally recognised human right. Fair

trials help establish the truth and are vital for everyone involved in a case.

They are a cornerstone of democracy, helping to ensure the development of

fair and just societies, and limiting of abuse perpetrated by state authorities.

In The Attorney General v Segulebbe Latheef and Another [2008] 1 SLR

225 the Court held that:

The Constitution in Sri Lanka expressly guarantees this right by Article

13(3) which states that; Any person charged with an offence shall be

entitled to be heard, in person or by an attorney-at-law, at a fair trial by

a competent court.

The right of an accused person to a fair trial is recognized in all the

criminal justice systems in the civilized world. Its denial is generally

proof enough that justice is denied."

CA/HCC/137/24

8 | P a g e

The profound duty of the trial court is to consider the evidence placed by the

prosecution and the defence on equal footings to arrive at its finding.

In R v. Hepworth 1928 (AD) 265, at 277, Curlewis JA stated:

A criminal trial is not a game where one side is entitled to claim

the benefit of any omission or mistake made by the other side,

and a Judge's position in a criminal trial is not merely that of an

umpire to see that the rules of the game are applied by both sides.

A Judge is an administrator of justice, not merely a figure-head,

he has not only to direct and control the proceedings according to

recognised rules of procedure but to see that justice is done.

The burden of proof is usually on the person who brings a claim in a dispute.

It is often associated with the Latin maxim semper necessitas probandi

incumbit ei qui agit, a translation of which is: "the necessity of proof always

lies with the person who lays charges."

To determine whether you are innocent or guilty, the trial judge must

consider the evidence presented by both sides with an open mind.

In this case the defence suggested to PW1 that the Appellant was not arrested

as described by PW1. Defence further suggested that the Appellant was

arrested at the Modera. The Appellant in his Dock Statement too had taken

up the position that this was an introduction which he never possessed.

In this case the raid was conducted without any specific information. The

information pertaining to this case was received while they were going on

routine crime prevention duty. Further, recovery and weighing the

production twice has failed to pass the probability test in this case. Further,

the defences case had led to very serious doubt in the prosecutions case.

CA/HCC/137/24

9 | P a g e

Had the learned Trial Judge looked in to the evidence presented in its correct

perspective, he should have accepted the evidence adduced by the Appellant.

Therefore, considering all the evidence presented in the trial, I conclude that

the appeal grounds advanced by the Appellant have very serious impact on

the prosecutions case.

As the prosecution had failed its duty to prove this case beyond a reasonable

doubt, I set aside the conviction and sentence imposed by the learned High

Court Judge of Colombo dated 28/06/2023 on the Appellant. Therefore, he

is acquitted from this case.

Accordingly, the appeal is allowed.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Colombo along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K. M. G. H. Kulatunga, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL