1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

In the matter of an Application under Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka for Writs in the nature of Certiorari and Mandamus.

CA (Writ) Application No: 275/2018

Ratnayake Arachchige Karunasena, Punchi Madavwa, Beragama, Ambalantota. PETITIONER

Vs. 1. Sri Lanka Mahaweli Authority, No. 500, T.B. Jaya Mawatha, Colombo 10.

2. Block Manager, Sri Lanka Mahaweli Authority, Mayurapura, Embilipitiya.

3. Divisional Secretary, Divisional Secretariat, Hambantota.

4. Warapitage Anil Kumara, Maha Ara, Near School, Beragama, Ambalantota. RESPONDENTS

2

Before: Arjuna Obeyesekere, J Counsel: Lukshman Amerasinghe with Nandana Malkumara for the Petitioner Suranga Wimalasena, Senior State Counsel for the 1st 3rd Respondents W. Dayaratne, P.C., with Nadeeka Arachchi for the 4th Respondent Written Tendered on behalf of the Petitioner on 15th July 2019 and 24th Submissions: June 2020. Tendered on behalf of the 1st 3rd Respondents on 27th June 2019

Tendered on behalf of the 4th Respondent on 22nd January 2020 Decided on: 4th September 2020 Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

The Petitioner has filed this application, seeking inter alia the following relief:

(a) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the permit marked P1A issued by the 1st

Respondent, the Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka to the 4th Respondent;

(b) A Writ of Mandamus directing the 1st Respondent to issue the Petitioner

a permit in respect of the land referred to in P1A which is occupied by

the Petitioner.

The facts of this matter very briefly are as follows.

The Petitioner claims that in 1989 the 3rd Respondent, the Divisional

Secretary, Hambantota had issued the Petitioner a permit in terms of Section

19(2) of the Land Development Ordinance in respect of a land situated in

Hambantota. While a copy of the said permit has been marked P1B, it is not

in dispute that the Petitioner does not have the original of the said permit,

3

with the Petitioner claiming that he had handed over the original to the 1st

Respondent. The Petitioner states that in 2008, the 1st Respondent had issued

the 4th Respondent the permit marked P1A in terms of Section 19(2) of the

Ordinance, in respect of the same land.

The Petitioner claims that he was in possession of the said land at the time

P1A was issued and that the said land was cultivated by the Petitioner. He

claims further that after P1A was issued, the 4th Respondent had tried to

forcibly enter the land, but as the Petitioner refused to yield possession, the

4th Respondent had filed a Rei Vindicatio action in the District Court of

Hambantota, against the Petitioner. The Petitioner admits that judgment was

entered against him, and that his appeal to the Provincial High Court of Civil

Appeal of the Southern Province had been dismissed. The Petitioner had

thereafter sought Special leave to Appeal from the Supreme Court, but leave

had been refused by the Supreme Court.

The Petitioner states that by a letter dated 22nd June 2009 marked P1C, the

3rd Respondent had confirmed that the permit issued to him is genuine. The

Petitioner states further that even at the time this application was filed, he

was in possession of the said land, and that he is therefore entitled to a fresh

permit in respect of the said land under the provisions of the Land

Development Ordinance.

The 1st Respondent states that by a notice published in terms of Section 3(1)

of the Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka Act No. 23 of 1979 in Gazette No. 137

dated 16th April 1981, marked R6, the Minister of Mahaweli Development

had declared a vast tract of land in Hambantota as a Special Area for the

purposes of the said Act, and that the land in respect of which the Petitioner is

seeking a permit is included in the said notice. The 1st Respondent states

further that since 1981, the administration of all State land within the area

declared in terms of R6 has been under the purview of the 1st Respondent,

and for that reason, the District Secretary, Hambantota, who is said to have

issued P1B does not have the power to issue the said permit.

4

This position has been confirmed by the 3rd Respondent who has stated in his

Statement of Objections that the said land comes under the purview of the 1st

Respondent, and that there are no records in the Divisional Secretarys Office,

Hambantota to show that P1B has been issued to the Petitioner.

The 1st Respondent states further that pursuant to an application made by the

4th Respondent for the allocation of a State land, the 1st Respondent, by a

letter dated 23rd January 2006 marked R1, had invited the 4th Respondent to

be present at the Land Kachcheri scheduled for 16th February, 2006. The 1st

Respondent, having been satisfied of the eligibility of the 4th Respondent to

receive a State land, had informed the Petitioner in July 2007 that he has been

selected as a recipient. The list containing the names of those who were

selected at the said Kachcheri, including the 4th Respondent, has been marked

R3. The 1st Respondent states that it was only thereafter that the 4th

Respondent was issued with the permit marked P1A in May 2008. A copy of

the land ledger relating to the land in dispute, with the name of the 4th

Respondent as the holder of the permit has been produced by the 1st

Respondent marked R5.

The Petitioner has produced with the petition marked P1 the appeal brief

containing inter alia the evidence that was led in the aforementioned District

Court case. This Court, having examined the evidence of the 4th Respondent,

who was the Plaintiff in that action, observes that the 4th Respondent had

come into unauthorized possession of the said land in 1988, and had

cultivated the said land thereafter. However, after the decision was taken to

issue a permit to the 4th Respondent, the Petitioner had forcibly entered the

said land in December 2007 and dispossessed the 4th Respondent, which

necessitated the filing of the Rei Vindicatio action in May 2008.

This Court has also examined the judgment of the learned District Judge and

observes that while the validity of the permit issued to the 4th Respondent has

been accepted, the learned District Judge has held that the Petitioner has

failed to prove that the permit P1B had been issued to him, and arrived at

the following conclusion:

5

ta wkqj js;a;s mdraYajh jsiska jsIh jia;=jg ;udg ysuslula we;s njg m%udKj;a mrsos kS;sfhka kshu lr we;s wdldrhg Tmamq lr fkdue;s nj ud jsiska

;SrKh lrus

The learned District Judge had thereafter held as follows:

me' 3 f,aLkh iusnkaOfhka tys uq,a msgm; bosrsm;a lr Tmamq lr we;s w;r th ksl=;a l, Y%s ,xld uyje,s wOsldrsfha ks,Odrshd jsiska tys ks;Hdkql+,Ndjh ikd: lr we;' js'1 f,aLkh iusnkaOfhka tjeks lsisoq idOkh lsrsula fkdue;s nejska js'1 f,ALkh fuu kvqfjs jsIh jia;=j neyer lr we;s wjir m;%hla njg ms<s.eksu ud jsiska m%;slafIam lrk w;r tkhskau me'3 f,aLkhg m%:ufhka fjk;a j,x.= f,aLkhla u.ska fuu kvqfj jsIh jia;=j fjk;a ;eke;af;l=g neyer lr ;snqfkao hkak ms<sn|j fuysoS i,ld ne,Sfus ffk;sl wjYH;djhla fkdue;s njo ;SrKh lrus' ta wkqj js;a;s mdraYajh ;ukag jsIh jia;=fjs ika;lh oerSu i|yd ks;Hdkql+, whs;sjdislula we;s njg Tmamq lr fkdue;s nj ud jsiska ;SrKh lrus' by;ska jsia;r lrk ,o wdldrhg fuu kvqfjs meusKs,s mdraYajh m%n, f,aLkuh idlaIs u.ska ;ukag jsIh jia;=jg we;s whs;sjdislu Umamq lr we;s nejska iy js;a;s mdraYajh ;ukag jsIh jia;=fjs ika;lh oerSug ks;Hdkql+, whs;shla we;s njg Tmamq lr fkdue;s nejska meusKs,slre fujeks kvqjl Tmamq lsrSfuS Ndrh jevsnr idlaIs u; idOkh lr we;s nj ;SrKh lrus' ta wkqj fuu kvqfj jsIh jia;=fjs whs;sjdislu iy N=la;sh 2008.05.07 osk isg fuu kvqfjs meusKs,slreg ysusjsh hq;= nj;a t;eka isg meusKs,slref.a ks;Hdkql+, N=la;shg ndOd lruska js;a;slre tys reoS isgsu u.ska meusKs,slreg whq;= w,dNhla isoqlr we;s nj;a

;SrKh lrus'1

The following issue raised by the Petitioner had been answered in the

negative by learned District Court:

fuu kvqjg wod, bvus lene,a, iusnkaOj yusnkaf;dg ksfhdaPH bvus

flduidrsia$w;sfral osidm;s ^bvus& jsiska 1989.03.17 osk bvus ixjraOk wd{dmkf;a 19 ^2& j.ka;sh hgf;a ksl=;a lrkq ,enq t,a't,a' 63464 orK

wjir m;%hla u; js;a;slreg ,nd os we;af;ao?

It is in the above circumstances that the Petitioner has invoked the jurisdiction

of this Court, seeking the aforementioned relief, with the principle argument

1 The permit issued to the 4th Respondent (P1A) had been marked as P3 before the District Court, while the permit said to have been issued to the Petitioner (P1B) had been marked as V1 before the District Court.

6

of the Petitioner being that the 1st Respondent could not have issued a permit

to the 4th Respondent while the permit issued to the Petitioner was in

existence. The question that this Court must therefore consider is whether the

1st Respondent acted in terms of the law when it issued the permit P1A to

the 4th Respondent.

In Council of Civil Service Unions vs Minister for the Civil Service2, Lord

Diplock stated that:

Judicial review has I think developed to a stage today when without

reiterating any analysis of the steps by which the development has come

about, one can conveniently classify under three heads the grounds upon

which administrative action is subject to control by judicial review. The

first ground I would call 'illegality', the second 'irrationality' and the third

'procedural impropriety'.

By 'illegality' as a ground for judicial review I mean that the decision

maker must understand correctly the law that regulates his decision

making power and must give effect to it. Whether he has or not is par

excellence a justiciable question to be decided in the event of dispute, by

those persons, the judges, by whom the judicial power of the state is

exercisable.

This Court is of the view that the permit marked P1A has been issued to the

4th Respondent in terms of the Ordinance, and that it is therefore not liable to

be quashed by a Writ of Certiorari, for the following reasons:

a) The 1st Respondent has followed the provisions of the Ordinance in

selecting the 4th Respondent as a beneficiary of the State land referred

to in P1A;

b) According to the records maintained by the 3rd Respondent, there is no

evidence of a permit having been issued to the Petitioner;

2 1985 AC 374

7

c) The disputed land falls within an area which has been administered by

the 1st Respondent since 1981, and even if P1B is genuine, the 3rd

Respondent did not have the authority to issue a permit to the

Petitioner;

d) In any event, the Petitioner does not possess the original of the permit

issued to him and his claim to the said land has been rejected by a Court

of Law.

It is trite law that for a Writ of Mandamus to issue, a petitioner must establish

that he has a legal right and that the Respondents have a corresponding legal

duty. As held by the Supreme Court in Ratnayake and Others vs C.D.Perera

and others:3

The general rule of Mandamus is that its function is to compel a public

authority to do its duty. The essence of Mandamus is that it is a

command issued by the superior Court for the performance of public

legal duty. Where officials have a public duty to perform and have

refused to perform, Mandamus will lie to secure the performance of the

public duty, in the performance of which the applicant has sufficient legal

interest.

For the reasons set out earlier, this Court is of the view that the Petitioner has

not established that he has a legal right to be issued a permit in terms of the

Ordinance, and is therefore not entitled to a Writ of Mandamus.

There is one other matter that this Court must advert to. The Respondents

have taken up the position that the Petitioner is guilty of laches, in that this

application has been filed in August 2018, whereas the permit P1A had been

issued in May 2008. The Petitioner has explained the delay on the basis that

he had to defend the District Court action, prior to challenging the validity of

the permit issued to the 4th Respondent. While there is no doubt that there

has been a long delay in invoking the jurisdiction of this Court, and that this 3 (1982) 2 Sri LR 451.

8

application is liable to be dismissed for delay if the explanation for the delay in

not accepted by this Court, the necessity for this Court to consider the said

explanation does not arise in view of the conclusion that this Court has arrived

at on the merits of this application.

This application is accordingly dismissed, without costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal