Page 1 of 6

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In matter of a Rule in terms of Article 105 (3) of the Constitution against Adambarage Desmond Chathuranga De Alwis.

Adambarage Desmond Chathuranga De Alwis, No. 356/6/A, Gangarama Road, Werahera, Boralesgamuwa.

RESPONDENT

Before: Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

Menaka Wijesundera J.

Mayadunne Corea J.

Counsel: Dilan Ratnayake PC, ASG with Chaya Sri Nammuni DSG for the Attorney

General.

Evidence Led on: 24.10.2024, 13.03.2024, 31.07.2024

Decided on: 18.09.2024

These proceedings were commenced in this Court under Article 105 (3) of the Constitution

against the Respondent (Adambarage Desmond Chathuranga De Alwis) based on a web

article uploaded by him on lankanewsweb.org on 30.04.2020 making purported accusations

of Bribery and Corruption against their Lordships of the Court of Appeal.

The said article is under the caption

... 50 ....

and it has been widely circulated on social media.

CA/Contempt of Court/06/2020

Page 2 of 6

The Criminal Investigations Department (CID) has investigated the matter and ascertained

that this article was uploaded to social media by the said Respondent. A transcript of the text

of the article was tendered to Court marked X1. His Lordship the President and the other

Honorable Judges of the Court of Appeal have taken cognizance of the above article attributed

to the said Respondent, amounts to Contempt of Court, warranting proceedings to be brought

against him in terms of Article 105 (3) of the Constitution.

On 01.04.2021, in open court, the Attorney General was informed by His Lordship the

President of the Court of Appeal that all the Hon. Judges of the Court of Appeal have reached

an agreement that the material available against the Respondent discloses an offence of

contempt of court. His Lordship the President of the Court of Appeal has obtained the views

of all the judges in this regard.

The Hon. Attorney General on 10.02.2022 submitted to Court the Rule formulated in terms

of the said Article 105 (3) against the Respondent and accordingly the Registrar of this Court

was directed to issue notice on the Respondent along with the said Rule. After reissuing notice

and the summons, this Court decided to issue notice once again on the Respondent through

the Fiscal of the District Court of Nugegoda to the address of the Respondent- No. 151,

Pepiliyana, Borelasgamuwa (the other address of the Respondent appears to be 356/06/A

Gangarama Road, Werahera, Boralesgamuwa). The Fiscal has reported that the Respondent

has gone abroad and accordingly, CID has taken endeavors to find the foreign address of the

Respondent with the assistance of the Interpol. As the CID informed Court that the

Respondent is absconding, the Attorney General moved that the matter be taken up for

Inquiry in the absence of the Respondent. It is observed that the Respondent has left the island

while the relevant Magistrates Court case was pending against him. It is noted that such

proceedings in the Magistrates court has been commenced against the Respondent as a

consequence of a complaint received by the Bar Association of Sri Lanka upon the said article

marked X1.

The following witnesses were examined-in-chief by the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor

General- Mr. Dilan Ratnayake (before he was conferred Silk)

1. Arangalage Don Samanmalee Devika Perera (a person known to the Respondent)

Page 3 of 6

2. Sujeewa Rathanayake (Deputy Controller, Department of Immigration and Emigration)

3. Konganiyage Ashen Gimhana Anthony (Police Constable 94001 Anthony)

4. B.N.M.A.S.K. Senarathne (Chief Inspector, OIC of the CID and Digital Forensic

Laboratory)

Based on the testimony of the above witnesses, this Court was convinced that sufficient

evidence was led before Court to establish that the Respondent is evading Court. Further,

based on the evidence led before Court, it can be assumed that the Respondent was well aware

of the nature of the charges and he has abused the process of court to evade Court proceedings.

Thus, the Court arrived at a conclusion that summoning the Respondent before Court will be

an onerous task and accordingly, decided to proceed with the Inquiry in respect of the Rule

that was issued against the Respondent and conduct the Inquiry in the absence of the said

Respondent (Accused).

Consequently, the following witnesses were examined in chief by the learned Additional

Solicitor General;

1. R. A. Mahinda Rajapaksa (Sub-Inspector, CID Cyber Crime Investigations Unit, Social

Media Unit)

2. B.N.M.A.S.K. Senarathne (Chief Inspector, OIC of the CID and Digital Forensic

Laboratory)

Considering the evidence of all of the above witnesses (including reports upon investigation

of the Computers taken into custody by the CID from the place the Accused was living in

Borelasgamuwa) and the special circumstances of this case, we are of view that satisfactory

evidence has been led to establish that;

i. the said article under the caption

... 50 ....

was widely circulated on social media- lankanewsweb.org,

Page 4 of 6

ii. the Respondent (Accused) who has acted as the administrator of the said website

lankanewsweb.org is the author and publisher of the above article containing purported

accusations which are serious in nature,

iii. the said article had been circulated approximately among 122 web users and shared

roughly among 4300 readers,

iv. the aforesaid website can be operated only by the Administrator i.e. the said Accused,

v. all the aspersions made against their Lordships of the Court of Appeal are false, defamatory

and malicious.

We have not received any evidence or material contrary to evidence adduced by the above-

mentioned witnesses. We find no reason whatsoever to believe purported accusations made

by the said Accused against certain Judges of the Court of Appeal (as allegedly described in

the article marked X1). Similarly, this Court has not received any evidence to support any

claim that these allegations against the Hon. Judges of the Court of Appeal are true or not

made with malicious intention. The Accused has failed neither to give oral testimony nor any

documentary evidence.

In his article, the Accused explicitly named His Lordship Justice A.H.M.D. Nawaz, their

Ladyships Justice Kumudini Wickramasinghe, and Justice Devika Abeyratne (now retired),

and made alleged accusations of bribery against them, specifying fixed sums of money. We

have carefully perused and examined the document marked X1 authored by the Accused

and take the view that creating such a false and malicious impression in the minds of the

public has adversely affected the credibility, integrity and the independence of the Court of

Appeal. Further, we are of the view that such statements will eventually tarnish the trust the

public reposes in the administration of justice and accordingly, the said Accused has seriously

violated his duty to abide by the law of the country and to protect the integrity of the Court

of Appeal.

In the circumstances, we are of the view that the article marked X1 authored and published

by the said Accused has been made and published with a clear intention of insulting their

Lordships of the Court of Appeal or to bring the Court of Appeal into disrepute. This

Page 5 of 6

eventually amounts to the interference with the course of justice or the abuse of process of

court.

In Vijitha Herath v. Secretary to the Treasury SC Contempt 2 -2023 dated 14.11.2023, the

Supreme Court has referred to the case of Mudiyanselage Vijit Reginald Perera v. The King 52

NLR 293 in which the definition of contempt has been defined as follows; There must be

involved some act done or writing published calculated to bring a Court or a judge of the Court into

contempt or to lower its authority, or something calculated to obstruct or interfere with the due course of

justice or the lawful process of the Courts. (see Reg v. Gray 1900 2 Q.B. 36.)

The Supreme Court in the same judgment has referred to the below paragraphs of the case of

Croos and Another vs Dabrera (1999) 1 SLR 205: -

The charge of contempt of Court was classically defined in the case of Regina vs Kopito by

Goodman J as the scandalizing of the Court, in that the words or the acts are likely to bring

the Court and the Judges in to disrepute.

The action taken with regard to acts of contempt is based on the premises that a well regulated

law of a civilized community cannot be sustained without sanctions being imposed for such

conduct. It is therefore thought important to maintain the respect and dignity of the Court and

its officers, whose task is to uphold and enforce the law, because without such respect, public faith

in the administration of justice would be undermined and the law itself would fall into disrepute.

The Supreme Court in the said judgement has further observed that, even if contempt is not

always a crime, it bears a criminal character and therefore, it must be satisfactorily proved.

Tilakawardena J. in the said Croos and Another case has held that the offence of contempt of

court under our law is a criminal charge and the burden of proof is that of proof beyond

reasonable doubt. We observe that the Contempt of a Court, Tribunal or Institution Act No.

8 of 2024 was certified on 01.02.2024 and it was after the Rule had been issued against the

Accused of these proceedings. As mentioned above this Court was convinced that the Inquiry

should be conducted in the absence of the Accused. Anyhow, regardless of the procedures

that were in place for contempt of court cases prior to the enactment of the said Act, we

Page 6 of 6

believe this Court has the inherent powers to make a decision Suo Moto in such proceedings

of contempt of court.

In light of the above and considering all the circumstances of this case we hold that the charges

against the Accused have been proved beyond reasonable doubt and accordingly we hold him

guilty of contempt of court. Moreover, we take the view that the said Accused should be

punished for such contempt.

Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Menaka Wijesundera, J.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Mayadunne Corea, J.

Judge of the Court of Appeal