;

I

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA.529/2000(F)

District Court Nuwara Eliya No.25/89/P

------------

Ahangama Vithanage Pedirick Appuhami of Nakanda, Ahangama.

Plaintiff (deceased)

Ahangama Vithanage Dayawansha of Nakanda, Ahangama.

Substituted Plaintiff (deceased) Vs. 1. Ahangama Vithanage Bandula Jayathilaka of

Atambagahawila Watta, Kananke, Imaduwa. At Present No. 48, Berdi Place, Colombo 06.

2. Ahangama Vithanage Herbert Jayathilaka of

Atambagahawila Watta, Kananke, Imaduwa. At Present No. 48, Berdi Place, Colombo O.

2A. Ranasinghe Kilipiti Kankanamge Nandawathie of Kananke, Imaduwa, (Substituted Legal representative of 2nd Defendant)

3. Ahangama Vithanage Chandra Jayathilaka of Nakanda {{Mills", Ahangama, Galle.

4. Ahangama Vithanage Dammika Jayathilaka of Nakanda {{Mills", Ahangama, Galle. At Present: 570 Ganagarama Road, Werahera, Boralesgamuwa.

5. Ahangama Vithanage Theja Jayathilaka of Nakanda {{Mills", Ahangama, Galle. At Present: Suriya Sevana, Makewita, Matara.

2

6. Ahangama Vithanage Nanda Jayathilaka of Nakanda "Mills", Ahangama, Galle. At Present: Idowita, 1st Lane, Templers Road, Mt. Lavinia.

7. Ahangama Vithanage Thilaka Jayathilaka of

"Sithuruwana", Waragoda, Kelaniya.

7A. Stanly Rajapakshe of No: 228, "Sithuruwana",

Waragoda, Kelaniya.

7B. Stanly Rajapakshe of No. 228, "Sithuruwana",

Waragoda, Kelaniya.

8. Ahangama Vithanage Somasiri Jayathilaka of A.V. Hinni Appuhami Company, Thalawakele.

9. Ahangama Vithanage Darmapala Jayathilaka of A.V. Hinni Appuhami Company, Thalawakele At

Present: Lanka Filing Station, Thalawakele.

10. Mahanama Geganage Piyadasa of Weer asing he

Hotel, Nuwara Eliya Road, Thalawakele.

11. Medda, Watta Gamage Peter of Weerasinghe

Hotel, Nuwara Eliaya Road, Thalawakele.

12. Rajan Rajagopal of Midiltion Kada Weediya,

Thalawakele Watta.

13. Kariyapathiranage Albert of Midilton Kada Weediya, Thalawakele Watta.

14. Mohomad Abdulla Ahamed Sabeer of Midilton

Kada Weediya, Thalawakele Watta.

15. Ahamed Sthree of Midilton Kada Weediya,

Thalawakele Watta.

3

Defendants. And Now Ahangama Vithanage Pedirick Appuhami of Nakanda, Ahangama.

Plaintiff (Deceased)

Ahangama Vithanage Oayawansha of Nakanda, Ahangama.

Substituted Plaintiff Appellant (Deceased)

1A.Padma Banduwathie Jayasinghe of "Piyasevana", Nakanda, Ahangama.

lB. Ahangama Vithanage Tharanga Chandimal of 63/81,a 1/1, Oambahena Road, Maharagama.

1e. Ahangama Vithanage Neranja Chandima of No. 18, Sesatha Watta, Waduramulla, Panadura.

10. Ahangama Vithanage Sadun Chandimal of II

Piyasevana", Nakanda, Ahangama.

Substituted Plaintiff Appellants. Vs.

Ol.Ahangama Vithanage Bandula Jayathilaka of Atambagahawila Watta, Kananke, Imaduwa. At Present No. 48, Berdi Place, Colombo 06.

1A. Ahangama Vithanage Somasiri Jayathilaka of A.V. Hinni Appuhami Company, Thalawakele.

2. Ahangama Vithanage Herbert Jayathilaka of

4

Atambagahawila Watta, Kananke, Imaduwa,

2A. Ranasinghe Kilipiti Kankanamge Nadawathie of Kananke, Imaduwa. (Substituted Legal representative of 2nd Defendant.)

03. Ahangama Vithanage Chandra Jayathilaka of Nakanda "Mills", Ahangama, Galle.

04. Ahangama Vithanage Dammika Jayathilaka of Nakanda "Mills", Ahangama, Galle. At Present: 570 Ganagarama Road, Werahera, Boralesgamuwa.

05. Ahangama Vithanage Theja Jayathilaka of Nakanda "Mills", Ahangama, Galle. At Present: Suriyasevana, Makewita, Matara.

SA. Mahinda Suryaarachchi .

sB. Heshan Theikshana Suryaarachchi.

sc. Harindi Therushini Suryaarachchi.

sD.Thilini Nuwandi Suryaarachchia all of suriyasevana, Makewita, Matara.

06.Ahangama Vithanage Nanda Jayathilaka of Nakanda "Mills", Ahangama, Galle. At Present: Idowita, 1st Lane, Templers Road, Mt. Lavinia.

07.Ahangama Vithanage Thilaka Jayathilaka of "Sithuruwana", Waragoda, Kelaniya.

7A. Stanly Rajapakshe of No: 228, "Sithuruwana", Waragoda, Kelaniya.

Before

5

7B. Stanly Rajapakshe of No. 228, USithuruwana",

Waragoda, Kelaniya.

08.Ahangama Vithanage Somasiri Jayathilaka of A.V. Hinni Appuhami Company, Thalawakele.

09.Ahangama Vithanage Darmapala Jayathilaka of A.V. Hinni Appuhami Company, Thalawakele At

Present: Lanka Filing Station, Thalawakele.

10. Mahanama Geganage Piyadasa of Weer asing he

Hotel, Nuwara Eliya Road, Thalawakele.

11. Medda, Watta Gamage Peter of Weerasinghe

Hotel, Nuwara Eliya Road, Thalawakele.

12. Rajan Rajagopal of Midilton Kada Weediya,

Thalawakele Watta.

13. Kariyapathiranage Albert of Midilton Kada Weediya, Thalawakele Watta.

14. Mohomad Abdulla Ahamed Sabeer of Midilton

Kada Weediya, Thalawakele Watta.

15. Ahamed Sthree of Midilton Kada Weediya,

Thalawakele Watta.

A.H.M.D. Nawaz. J E.A.G.R. Amaraskara. J

Defendant Respondents.

Counsel: Harsha Soza P.c. with Athula Perera for the Substituted Plaintiff-

Appellants. Thishya Weragoda with Sanjaya Marambe, Piyumi Jayamanne, Chinthaka Sugathapala and Iresh Senaviratne for the Substituted lA Defendant-

6

Respondent. Kapila Suriyaarachchi with Anuradha Bandara for the 6th Defendant-Respondent

Decided on: 21.09.2018

E.A.G.R. Amarasekara. J

The substituted Plaintiff-Appellant filed this appeal before this court praying inter-

alia, to set aside the Judgment dated 23.08.2000 of the Learned District Judge in

the case No. 25/89/P ofthe District Court of Nuwara Eliya. The substituted Plaintiff-

Appellant, pt Defendant-Respondent and 6th Defendant-Respondent took part in

the arguments through written submissions as well as oral submissions of their

counsel.

The main point of contest in this Appeal is whether the corpus sought to be

partitioned in the partition action before the learned District Judge was an asset of

a partnership business run under the name and style of A.V. Hinniappuhamy and

Company or whether it is a co-owned property which could be a subject matter of

a partition action. As per the plaint, the corpus is a divided portion of the Middleton

Estate in extent of 2 Roods and 38 perches. While the plaintiff prayed for the

partition of the corpus as per the pedigree set out in the plaint, 1st to 9th Defendant

Respondents except the 2nd Defendant-Respondent filed their statement of claims

and sought a dismissal of the Plaintiff's case on the ground that the corpus was an

asset of the partnership business. They specially pleaded that as per Section 55(1)

of the Partition Act, the Plaintiff was not entitled to file this partition action. The

7

learned District Judge upheld the aforesaid position of the Defendant -

Respondents and dismissed the Plaintiff's action with costs.

The Substituted Plaintiff-Appellants in their 1st written submissions dated

27/04/2015 have made submissions referring to section 18 of the Prevention of

Frauds Ordinance, but that section is relevant only in relation to the establishment

of a partnership where the capital exceeds one thousand rupees. In this action as

per the evidence led, it is common ground that there existed a partnership business

among Ahangama Vithanage Hinniappuhamy, Ahangama Vithanage Pedrick

Appuhamy alias Punchi Appuhamy (Plaintiff) and Gammanpilage Dharmadasa until

1962. Even the document marked P14, on which all the parties rely on their

arguments, establishes that there was a partnership business among the aforesaid

partners. However, as per the evidence led and P14, said Ahangam Vithanage

Hinniappuhamy died on the 10th April 1962. It must be remembered, unlike a

corporation or company that has a legal personality irrespective of its members, a

partnership lacks continuity. Death, Bankruptcy, retirement or insanity of any

partner may lead the partnership to an end. The substituted Plaintiff Appellants in

their 1st written submissions dated 27.04.2015 refer to Pate V Pate 11 NLR 254,

Browns V Davis 41 NLR 176, Underhill's Principles of the Law of Partnership (12th

Edition) page 79 and bring to the attention of this court that;

1. The law applicable to partnership matters is the law of England,

2. A partnership is dissolved ipso facto by the death of a partner, in the absence

of an agreement to the contrary.

8

There is no evidence placed before the court that there was an agreement among

the aforesaid 4 partners with regard to the continuation of the partnership after

the death of one party. Therefore, with the death of aforesaid Hinniappuhamy, the

partnership that existed among the aforesaid 4 partners has to be considered as

dissolved as per law. P14 proves that the property in question was bought by the

said deceased Hinniapphamy and Dharamadasa Gammanpila from the money

advanced to them from the assets of the partnership business and the said

investment in the property bought were considered as part of the assets of the

partnership business.

However, with the death of said Hinniappuhamy the remaining partners should

have settled the accounts of the partnership as it is dissolved by operation of law,

but it appears from P14 that the 3 remaining partners continued to be engaged in

a partnership business along with the son of deceased Hinniappuhamy under the

same name and style 'A.V. Hinniappuhamy & Company. This partnership has to be

considered as a new partnership among the 3 partners of the previous partnership

and Bandula Jayathilake, the son of the deceased Hinniappuhamy. Under normal

circumstances, Bandula Jayathilake, the 1st Defendant can consent only with regard

his share of the interests of the deceased Hinniappuhamy in the assets of the

previous partnership to be made part of the assets of new partnership created after

the death of said Hinniappuhamy, but this court observes that the other heirs of

the deceased Hinniappuhamy, namely the 1st to 9th Defendant Respondents but

except the 2nd Defendant Respondent stood together with 1st Defendant Bandula

in filing a statement of claim in the original court. Even the 2nd Defendant was silent

9

with regard to the position of the other heirs of the deceased Hinniappuhamy. This

shows that they were in agreement with Bandula the pt Defendant in stating that

the property was part of the partnership business. This situation makes it appear

that they consented to Bandula, the 1st Defendant to carryon with the new

partnership business created after the death of Hinniappuhamy their father, using

Hnniappuhamy's share and or interests in the previous partnership as assets of the

new partnership. Otherwise other heirs of said Hinniappuhamy would have

contested the position taken up by the pt Defendant A.V. Bandula Jayathilake. On

the other hand, there is no evidence to show that deceased Hinniappuhamy's other

heirs asked for or filed an action for the settlement of accounts of the pervious

partnership. The aforesaid circumstances together with the contents of P14

confirm on balance of probability that there was a new partnership from 1962

onwards between the remaining partners of the previous partnership and A.V.

Bandula Jayathilake representing the heirs or estate of the deceased

Hinniappuhamy and the corpus of the partition action was part of the assets of that

new partnership too. As per the evidence, the existence of a partnership business

up to the dissolution referred to in P14 too is not disputed, but according to the

law it cannot be the same partnership that existed previously. However, P14

though titled at the beginning as a Dissolution of Partnership at page 5 states as

follows;

IIAnd whereas the said business is continued to be carried on from 01.09.1969 by

the Pedrick Appuhamy and said Bandula

And whereas for the purpose of the winding up the affairs of the said partnership

being dissolved in so far as the said partners Janis Appuhamy and Dharmadasa

10

were concerned as aforesaid in the partnership until 31st ,August 1969 and to settle

all matters in so far as they are concerned the Janis Appuhamy the party of the

First part ,Pedrick Appuhamy the party of the Second part, Dharmadasa the party

of the Third part and Bandula the party of the fourth part have agreed to enter in

to these presents."

Even in the pt clause on page 6 of P 14 following phraseology can be observed.

"1. The said business carried on in partnership by the said Janis Appuhamy, Pedrick

Appuhamy, Dharmadasa and Bandula until 3pt August 1969

.............................................. is hereby agreed and declared to have been dissolved as

from 3pt August 1969 as far as the said partners Janis Appuhamy and Dharmadasa

are concerned." (Highlighting is done by me)

The matter that this court has to consider now is whether;

a. The said partnership carried on by Bandula Jayatilaka and the reamaining

partners of the previous partnership from 1962 continued after the

dissolution referred to in P14, or it is another new partnership under the

same name and style between Bandula Jayatilaka and Pedrick Appuhamy.

b. Whether the corpus in the partition action relevant to this appeal is part of

the assets of the said partnership that existed after the execution of P14 at

the date of filing the plaint in the said partition action.

A careful perusal of P14 shows that;

1. It is titled as 'Dissolution of partnership", indicating that the main intention

was to dissolve the then existing partnership that had four partners.

11

2. It has contemplated the lands bought by the partners of the previous

partnership as asset ofthe said partnerships, the lorries it had and the values

lying to the credit of each partner at the death of partner A.V. Hinniapuhamy.

3. It has also contemplated the values lying in to the credit of the partners of

the partnership that carried on the business after the death of

Hinniappuhamy as at 31.08.1969 which is the date of retirement of two

partners as well as the date of dissolution (It should be noted that the value

lying to the credit of Bandula, the pt Defendant has been further described

by adding the words ( for estate of A.V. Hinniappuhmy' indicating that

accounts of the previous partnership was not settled after the death of

Hinniappuhamy but what was owed to the Hinniappulamy's estate was

invested in the new partnership in 1962 and the partner Bandula, the 1st

Defendant was representing that estate.)

4. It has further contemplated the lorries belonging to the 2nd partnership as at

the date of dissolution which is the date of retirement of two partners

namely, Janis Appuhamy and Dharmadasa.

The above indicates that the partners in executing P14 were considering the

assets and the share values that came from the previous partnership and the

assets and share values as at the date of retirement of the two partners or the

date of dissolution of the 2nd partnership. Unless they wanted to settle dues of

the partnerships of 4 partners they need not have considered all these. This

gives a weight to think that the partners wanted to terminate the partnership

started by them in 1962 after the death of Hinniappuhamy.

12

The Defendant Respondents argue that the partnership continued even after the

execution of P14 stating the dissolution was done only as far as the two retiring

partners were concerned.

However, the careful reading of the above quoted paragraphs will show that pt

Defendant Bandula and Peddrik Appuhamy (original Plaintiff) continued to carry on

the same business after 01.11.1969 but not the same partnership and aforequoted

paragraphs further show that the partners intended to wind up the affairs of the

partnership business that they carried on. Trade name has a good will. It has a

proprietary value. It is something that can be transferred. Therefore, mere use of

the same trade name by some of the partners after the dissolution of a partnership

will not make the new business relationship a continuation of the previous

partnership. Partnership generally means an arrangement of two or more persons

by which they agree to share in all assets, profits, and financial and legal liabilities.

So, it is a relationship between the partners. If two retires from the partnership

business and the other two continue with the same business, the relationship

between the two who continue with the business forms a new partnership as far

as the retired persons do not share profits, losses and pool assets to continue the

business. There is no evidence to show that the two partners when retired on

31.08.1969 continued to contribute to the assets, capital, or shared the profits of

the business after the dissolution by P14. In such a situation dissolution of the

partnership that existed between 1st Defendant, Bandula and the remaining 3

partners of the original partnership has to be considered as the termination of the

partnership business relationship between them. Even two of them carried on the

same businesses under the same name and style, it is a new partnership between

and limited to those two. In such a backdrop the phrases such as 'partnership

13

being dissolved in so far as the said partners Janis Appuhamy and Dharmadasa .... "

has to be interpreted giving a limited meaning. Such words only indicate the

continuation of business name and the business by the remaining partners.

However, there is no evidence to show that the remaining two partners after the

dissolution of the partnership by P14 agree to include the corpus of the partition

action as an asset of the new partnership between those two partners.

On the other hand, for the sake of argument, if it is considered that the

continuation of business by aforesaid two partners under the same name and style

after the dissolution referred to in P 14 as a continuation of the partnership that

existed prior to the dissolution referred to in P14, clauses 4 and 5 of P14 are

important in resolving the dispute with regard to the corpus whether it is a property

of any partnership at the time of instituting the partition action. As per the said

two clauses the partners in winding up the partnership agreed to give absolute and

personal entitlement Dharmadasa ofthe share of the corpus purchased by him and

he in turn agreed to transfer it to the original Plaintiff. Accordingly, said

Dharmadasa has executed P12 transferring the same to original Plaintiff and P12

confirms that said Dharmadasa transfer his right in the corpus to the original

Plaintiff. The said deed does not mention that the transfer is subject to any interest

of the partnership between the original Plaintiff and the 1st Defendant Bandula. It

is clear that, as Dharmadasa got absolute entitlement, the original Plaintiff got clear

title to his share of the corpus as a co-owner without any encumbrance.

14

Though the learned District Judge has said in his Judgement that the corpus is

mentioned in the account sheets of the Partnership, it is not correct with regard

to the balance sheet as at 31.03.1974 (1514) which is the only balance sheet

relevant to a year after the dissolution by P14. It does not describe the land and

buildings belonging to the partnership, but only state 'as per the last balance sheet'

but the Defendants have not tendered the balance sheets for the year 1973, 1972,

1971 and 1970 which are the years following the dissolution of the partnership by

P14. Under such circumstances the term 'as per the last balance sheet' cannot be

construed to indicate as same as the assets of the partnership that was dissolved

by P 14.

For the foregoing reason this court cannot agree with the decision of learned

District Judge that the corpus of the partition action forms part of the assets of an

existing partnership and that it cannot be partitioned. The learned District judge

erred in evaluating evidence before him and applying law relating to partnerships.

Therefore, this court has to vacate the judgment dated 23.08.2000 of the learned

District Judge of Nawara Eliya in case No P 25/89.

Though this court vacate the judgment of the learned District Judge, this court

cannot proceed to make an order to partition the whole corpus depicted in the

preliminary Plan No. 2632 dated 09.10.1997 for the reasons given below in this

judgment.

It is true parties have admitted the corpus depicted in the aforesaid plan and the

deeds tendered by the Plaintiff to support his pedigree were not challenged at the

closure of the Plaintiff's case or when they were marked. There is nothing to

15

suspect the credibility of those deeds. However, it is the duty of the judge in a

partition action to investigate title. To investigate title, he must identify the co-

owned property and the relevant pedigree. His duty is not limited by the points of

contest raised or the admission made by the parties. It must be remembered the

decree in a partition action is a decree in REM.

As per the pedigree presented in the plaint, the co-owners who held ~ share each,

namely A.V. Hinniappuhamy and D. Gammanpila have disposed undivided 37

perches by al. 3, a l4, al. 5, al. 9, al. 11 and as per the plaint and the evidence led,

it is included in the Plan made by the preliminary survey. However, schedules to

the said deeds as well as the Plaintiff's evidence (see page 1 of the proceedings

dated 28.11.1997) establish that those deeds conveyed to the vendees of those

deeds specific and divided portions mentioned in those schedules. Since both the

co-owners of that time got together to transfer those specific and divided portions

totaling up to 37 perches all together, those deeds give sole ownership to the

specific and divided portions mentioned in the schedules of those deeds to the

respective vendees of those deeds. Since those deeds do not create co-ownership,

specific and divided portions mentioned in the schedule to the deeds marked al. 3,

al. 4, al. 5, al. 9 and al. 11 have to be identified and excluded from the land

depicted in the preliminary survey plan. It is only a co-owned land that can be a

subject matter of a partition action. Therefore, the relevant lots referred to in the

said deeds, as per the plan No. 419 dated 13.02.1958 have to be superimposed on

the preliminary plan to identify the co-owned land of the Plaintiff and the 1_9th

Defendant. It is necessary to lay the boundaries on the ground as per the

1

16

superimposition to see someone or many have encroached the boundaries and

have claims to any portions within the real co-owned corpus to be identified by the

superimposition.

Hence this court in hearing this appeal;

1. Vacate the judgement dated 23.08.2000 of the District Court, Nuwara Eliya

in case No. 25/89/P.

2. Direct the learned District Judge to issue a commission to superimpose plan

No. 419 dated 13.12.1958 on the preliminary Plan to identify the co-owned

portion of the land surveyed in the preliminary Plan and lay the boundaries

on the ground as per the superimposition to identify the co-owned property.

3. Direct the learned District Judge to exclude the 37 perches disposed byal.3.

alA. al.5. al.9 and alII from the land surveyed in the aforesaid preliminary

plan No. 2632.

4. After excluding the 37 perches, if there is no dispute with regard to the laying

of boundaries on the ground as per the superimposition, divide the rest

between the original Plaintiff and 1-9 Defendant's giving each side a Yz share.

5. If there arises any dispute or claim with regard to the laying of superimposed

boundaries on the ground in identifying the co-owned land which should be

the corpus to be partitioned, the lea rned District Judge is empowered to hear

evidence to that extent which is needed to identify the co- owned land by

the plaintiff and the defendant.

17

Thus, the appeal is allowed but with the above directions to the learned

District Judge.

E.A.G.R. Amarasekara. J Judge of the Court of Appeal

I Agree.

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J Judge of the Court of Appeal