IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Court of Appeal Case No. HCC 44/2015

High Court of Gampaha Case No. HC 69/2009

Complainant

v.

Don Chandana Priyantha Rupasinghe

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Don Chandana Priyantha Rupasinghe

Accused Appellant

v.

Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Complainant Respondent

1

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

FILED ON

JUDGMENT ON

K. PRIY ANTHA FERNANDO, J.

K.K. WICKREMASINGHE, J

K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J

Shavindra Fernando PC with Ananda Weerasinghe for the Accused Appellant.

Rohantha Abeysuriya ASG for the Respondent.

30.09.2019

26.01.2018 by the Accused Appellant.

05.03.2019 by the Respondent.

26.11.2019

01. The Accused Appellant (Appellant) in this case was indicted in the High

Court of Gampaha on one count of murder. The victim (deceased) Thejani

Rupasinghe was Appellant's wife. After trial the learned High Court Judge

found the Appellant guilty of the charge and sentenced him to death. Being

aggrieved by the said conviction and the sentence the Appellant preferred

the instant appeal. The grounds of appeal as urged by the counsel for the

Appellant at the argument stage are:

1. That the learned Trial Judge erred in concluding that the weapon was

fired from a distance of 30cm away from the head of the deceased

2

when in fact the evidence disclosed that the nozzle of the weapon was

almost touching the head of the deceased when the shot was fired.

2. That the learned Trial Judge made the distance the whole ground for

rejecting the defence claim that it was a case of suicide.

3. That the learned Trial Judge took into account hearsay evidence which

was of great prejudicial value against the Appellant.

4. That the learned Trial Judge failed to consider the defence in a fair

manner and the Appellant was deprived of a fair trial.

02. Brief facts of the case are, that the Appellant and the victim (deceased)

were husband and wife. Appellant was a serving Brigadier in the Sri

Lankan Army. On the fateful night the Appellant had been sleeping with

the deceased in their bedroom upstairs. PW2 who was the brother of the

victim had been sleeping in another bedroom upstairs with the son of the

Appellant (PW I). All bed rooms had been air-conditioned. PW2 had heard

a noise. He had thought that someone threw a stone at the gate. Then the

Appellant had come shouting saying "lJ!8 'ilDd@ lJ!8 'ilDd@". PWI had

followed the Appellant to the bedroom that the Appellant and the deceased

were sleeping, to see the deceased was on the bed straight. He had seen

saliva coming out of her mouth as if she was having an epileptic fit. He had

then seen blood on her head.

03. Soldiers who had been downstairs had come with the son (PWl) and they

had taken the deceased to the hospital. Appellant had driven the vehicle to

3

the hospital. Deceased had succumbed to her injuries about 2 hours after

admission to the hospital.

04. There is no dispute that the shot was fired from the personal weapon of the

Appellant and that the deceased died of that gunshot injury. The version of

the Appellant is that the deceased committed suicide by shooting herself.

Appellant gave a lengthy dock statement. While he was sleeping with the

deceased, he had heard a noise of cocking a weapon. From the light

emerged from the window he had seen the deceased holding the weapon

towards her head. He had tried to grab the weapon but the deceased had

shot herself. He had quickly called the son. He had rushed the deceased to

the hospital with the son, brother in law and with the assistance of the

soldiers. PWI (son of the deceased) listed in the indictment was called to

give evidence by the defence.

05. The only eye witness to the shooting who is among the living is the

Appellant. The version of the prosecution is that the Appellant had shot at

the deceased. Version of the Appellant is that the deceased committed

suicide. Therefore, it is the duty of the Trial Judge to carefully analyze all

the evidence direct and circumstantial including the medical evidence and

to decide whether the prosecution has proved beyond reasonable doubt that

it was the Appellant who shot at the deceased.

06. All four grounds of appeal can be considered together as they all are based

on the same footing where the issue is whether it was homicide or suicide. I

have carefully considered the evidence adduced at the Trial, Judgment of

the learned High Court Judge, grounds of appeal urged by the Appellant,

4

written submissions filed by counsel and oral submissions made by counsel

for the Appellant as well as the Respondent at the argument.

07. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the learned High Court Judge

erred when he decided that at the time the shot from the firearm was fired,

the distance between the firearm and the head of the deceased (injury) had

been 30 centimeters. The Consultant Judicial Medical Officer Dr.

Wijewardena who testified on behalf of the defence was more qualified and

experienced than the Medical Officer Dr. Lansakkara who testified for the

prosecution, counsel submitted. Dr. Lansakkara had never observed the

blood platter seen in the photograph of the victim's hand marked as

4V13(3) that was taken by the SOCO officers. It is the contention of the

counsel for the Appellant that those blood platter shows that it had been a

suicide as the blood would spread on the hand of the person who holds the

weapon when that person commits suicide by shooting herself according to

Dr. Wijewardena.

08. Counsel further submitted that the investigating officers have failed to

check the fingerprints on the weapon so that they could have excluded

suicide if there were no fingerprints of the deceased on the weapon. PW2

who is the brother of the deceased had been bias towards the prosecution.

On the material points PWI who was called to give evidence by the

defence has contradicted the evidence given by PW2, counsel submitted.

The learned Trial Judge was wrong when she found that the bullet had

travelled parallel to the floor as according to entry wound and the exit

wound the bullet had travelled upwards.

5

09. Counsel for the Respondent submitted that the position taken by the

defence is improbable. As the deceased had used the weapon twice prior to

this instance, the Appellant should have taken more precautions to keep the

weapon safe. However, counsel for the Respondent conceded that the

learned Trial Judge has misinterpreted the range, when she said at page

1194 of her Judgment that the distance between the head and the weapon at

the time the shot was fired was 30 centimeters as that was not the evidence

of the Medical Officer who gave evidence for the prosecution.

10. It is the contention of the counsel for the Appellant that the deceased had

received a blood platter on her hand as she shot herself. Counsel refers to

the evidence of Dr. Wijewardena. The photograph of the victim's hand

marked as 4VI3(3) was taken by the SOCO officers. Dr. Wijewardena

testified that a blood platter is visible on the hand of the deceased. Dr.

Wijewardena who testified on behalf of the defence had not personally

observed the body of the deceased. He merely gives evidence on seeing the

photograph after 5 years. Further, there is a possibility of blood getting

onto the hand even when the deceased was being taken to the hospital or

when she was given initial treatment at the hospital. Therefore, I am of the

view that it is unsafe to conclude that the blood platter seen on the hand of

the deceased would have spread on the hand when she shot herself with the

pistol.

II. In her Judgment at page 45 (page 1194 of the brief) the learned Trial Judge

said;

"@OeJi}Rfi):J8c"EJ ('[)t5 t:iJl(@ Bb [)25) tJEJ rf3zf3 qtJc" (,;!W zg[):J0c"

qt:iJO bO ('(';!. &. 30 z:;! S[)EJ tJeslZ('c.:Jzs/ Rfi)le;[)25) 0<; ('('[)<;:v[)oc.:J:J<;

B8(02fJ. Bc.:J~tJ 25)(';!:J (Ol:;fj@Rfi)? ('S:J('w:/ tJEJ rf3zf3 qtJc.:J (jl [)Zc.:J wl z:;! ('z:;!

Contact Range eJ25)@, eJc.:J BcfzoEJ ed'(j~(!J[) S[) (jlWl~8 ('Rfi)8zf3. e1

6

CfPlJ[) cBzfi Cf8", W:J Bdzo CflSJO Ol[)5J OOlSJO'" !5'@@ @O&", B",~8

Z5)e,,:J(f)lz55@Z;! S[)C) z51(f)@Z5)'" ;jfJ@C) Cf[)R!SJ:J(JJ"'z;! Z5)llSJ.

@w5J:d e"e;w:d R!SJ(; R!SJdz~ CfPlJ[) 8Zi15J", !5'@@ @O&R!SJ:JfJ", B",~8

Z5)e,,:J(f)lz55@z;! R!SJ(; S[)C) !9[):J C;lz;!t)@C) c;Zile,,:Jw R!SJ(;C;, 6", CftJR!SJO&"'C)

B tt (f) lSJ !5' Z5):JW l R!SJ. "

12. Dr. Lansakkara, the witness for the prosecution who conducted the autopsy

on the body of the deceased in his evidence said that the weapon has been

almost touching the head of the deceased at the time it was fired. In his

evidence at page 465 he said;

"@!5'a! zfifJZ;!~& CfPlJ[) !5'@'" e":J@:JZ5)JJ!5'",:d !5'R!SJ:J6!fJ", 5J!5'S<;'?

C)lf)8:d Z5)@l5J @"':J[)(3", !5'R!SJ:J6!fJ", WOW:J "':J!5'@ e,,@w:J8lSJ:J[)'"

!5'(f):JfJz;! Cffd8. !5'R!SJ:J6!fJ", Cfd!5'd !5'[)t} !5'S!5'wZiI Z5)lSJO {)Z5) z51e,,:J @:J!5'a!

zfi(f)@Z5)'" {)!5':d !5'@'" e,,@C) ;j{)f), !5'R!SJ:J6!fJ", Cfd!5'd, e,,@C) ;j{)f)@

lSJlZ5)R!SJ? oZilzg {)Z5) !5'[)t} c; 6/fJ",z;! z51e,,:J Bb{) zg[):JC"'z;! S[)B. "

13. Dr. Wijewardena who testified for the defence clearly said that the nozzle

of the weapon had been almost touching the head when the weapon was

fired. At pages 971 and 972 the witness said;

9 : (i)@() @c.:l:/025lJ Z;)~@1jmsi @@) oaroJzsi 06.& oB2lil'~.& DJ~2SlJ@D e,,~~~

q~D, @e"zsi8@()~ 30 2lil' q2Sl6 ~6z;) ~ 8~~ 2S.lDJCc.:l2lil' ztilc.:lCJ @c.:l:/025lJ

Z;)~@1mzsi w@ ag(J)zsi25lDJ<;?

7

C : l15Ml",(), 63e,,() qJe"ZlfZ51G'cl63e,,() mlG'El@Zlf OElzSlZ51 qEle,;dJEl2m~ G'Ml qB

@"'Jzsi2m G'EltlEl ZSJElJC",1:ii @lB25f G'e,,25fo@l()~ 30 G'Ele.'l ~~zll25f

G'EltlEl ZSJElJC",1:ii El(l;lG''''Zlf Sgm25fZ51ElJ.

14. Therefore, it is clear that the learned Trial Judge was wrong when she said

that the Doctor Wijewardena who testified for defence admitted that the

range between the head and the weapon had been 30 centimeters. Learned

Additional Solicitor General for the Respondent conceded to the fact that

the learned Trial Judge has misdirected herself when she concluded that the

gap between the nozzle and the head had been 30 centimeters and that the

doctor who testified for defence has admitted so. As submitted by the

counsel for the Appellant, the learned Trial Judge has excluded suicide

mainly on that wrong premise as said in her Judgment at page 1194.

15. The learned Trial Judge in her Judgment, accepting the evidence of

Government Analyst on the damage to the mosquito net and the almirah,

has concluded that the bullet had gone parallel to the floor. She has rejected

the evidence of Dr. Wijewardena on that point as Dr. Wijewardena had

gone to the scene after 5 years. Learned Trial Judge has again excluded the

possibility of suicide on that basis stating that the bullet had travelled

parallel to the floor. It is unlikely that the bullet could travel parallel to the

floor if the deceased had shot herself, the learned Trial Judge concluded

(page 1192).

16. However, the learned Trial Judge has again misdirected herself on the

travel line of the bullet. According to the post mortem report of the

deceased and the evidence of Dr. Lansakkara who conducted the autopsy

8

the entry wound had been 7 centimeters above the right ear (page 462) and

the exit wound had been 12 centimeters above the left ear on the top of the

head (page 471). Therefore, the bullet had clearly travelled upwards.

Therefore, the learned Trial Judge was wrong when she excluded

possibility of suicide on the basis that the bullet had travelled parallel to the

floor. The travel line of the bullet has to be decided on the entry wound and

the exit wound. The entry and the exit wounds also can clearly be seen in

photographs marked and produced as 4VI2(1) and 4V12(2).

17. The learned High Court Judge in her Judgment at page 1189 had said that

the deceased was a housewife who had no weapon training and therefore

the position taken by the defence that she had previously tried to shoot

herself cannot be accepted. In his statement from the dock the Appellant

had said that once the deceased had threatened to shoot one of his drivers

named Galappaththi aiming the pistol to his head. In another incident the

deceased had threatened to shoot herself holding the pistol after an

argument. The above-mentioned Galappaththi who was the army driver

attached to the Appellant also gave evidence on behalf of the defence. He

testified to the fact that on an issue of the Appellant going to Aruadhapura,

the deceased had threatened to kill him with the pistol aiming the pistol at

him. That had been about 5 months before the incident in this case.

Prosecution had failed to mark any contradiction in his evidence to attack

the credibility of Galappaththi. His evidence had been consistent. Although

there is no evidence to say that the deceased was given weapon training, as

a wife of a Brigadier in the army she had been familiar with the weapons,

especially with the personal weapon of the Appellant.

18. Brother of the deceased who is the brother in law of the Appellant in his

evidence has tried to show that the Appellant deliberately tried to delay

9

taking the deceased to hospital. Contrary to his evidence, the son of the

deceased and the Appellant Chathura Dhananjaya Rupasinghe has given

evidence. Although the above witness was the PWI listed in the

indictment, he was not called by the prosecution. He was called by the

defence. He said that the Appellant drove the vehicle fast to the hospital.

Although this witness was cross examined at length by the prosecution, his

evidence was not challenged on this point. It is apparent that the witness

PW2 was an interested witness who was bias towards the prosecution.

PWI also said in evidence that there had been instances where the

deceased threatened to commit suicide while holding the pistol. The

learned Trial Judge has failed to consider the evidence of the son PW1,

when she came to the conclusion that the Accused was not telling the truth

about the deceased trying to commit suicide before. She has only

mentioned about the dock statement on that issue, but not considered the

evidence ofPW I who was called by defence.

19. As submitted by the counsel for the Appellant and conceded by the counsel

for the Respondent, investigating officers have failed to check for the

fingerprints on the pistol. Prosecution has failed even to produce evidence

on whether the deceased was right-handed or left-handed. If she was left-

handed, that evidence could have excluded suicide as the entry wound was

above the right ear ofthe deceased.

20. As submitted by the counsel for the Respondent, the fireann used had been

issued to the Appellant officially. As there had been previous incidents of

handling the weapon by the deceased, the Appellant could have taken extra

precautions in looking after the weapon preventing the deceased getting

access to it. As further submitted by the counsel for the Respondent, there

10

is no evidence to see where the weapon was kept that day before the couple

went to sleep.

21. In case of Queen V. Sumanasena (66 N.L.R. 350) Coul1 held;

"In a criminal case suspicious circumstances do not

establish guilt. Nor does the proof of any number of suspicious

circumstances relieve the prosecution of its burden of proving the

case against the accused beyond reasonable doubt and compel the

accused to give or call evidence. "

22. It is for the prosecution to prove beyond reasonable doubt that it was the

Appellant who fired the shot on the deceased by direct or circumstantial

evidence and to exclude suicide. In the above premise I find that the

prosecution has failed to prove the charge beyond reasonable doubt against

the Appellant. In the circumstances I see there is merit in the grounds urged

on behalf of the Appellant. Therefore, we set aside the conviction and the

sentence of death passed on the Accused-Appellant and acquit him.

Appeal is allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K.K. WICKREMASINGHE, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

11