IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Case No. 1269/2000 (F)

D.C. Galle No. 27S0/SPU97

1. Danthika Lakshamani Abeywardena Wickramasinghe,

No. 154, Old Galle Road,

Weligama.

2. Chinthanika Abeywardena Wickramasinghe,

Batadolawatte, Kirinda,

Puhuwella.

PLAINTIFF ~ APPELLANTS

~Vs~

Hettiarachchige Sunny de Alwis

rt DEFENDANT ~RESPONDENT

1a. Hettiarachchige Uditha Kumara Alwis,

No. 221/2, 2nd Lane,

Soma Thalagala Mawatha, Gangodawila,

Nugegoda.

1b. Hettiarachchige Bandula Kumara Alwis,

Weweldegiliya, Mihintala Road,

Galkulama.

le. Kumarasinghe Mohottalalage Anulawathie,

Weweldegiliya, Mihintala Road,

Galkulama.

SUBSTITUTED 1st DEFENDANT ~ RESPONDENTS

1

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Written Submissions on:

Decided on

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,J.

2. National Savings Bank,

No.255, Galle Road,

Colombo 3.

3. Manager,

National Savings Bank,

Galle Branch, Kaluwella,

Galle.

DEFENDANT ~ RESPONDENTS ~ RESPONDENTS

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,j.

D.P. Mendis, PC with J.K. Siriwardena for

Plaintiff-Appellants

Champika Ladduwahetty for 1st Defendant-Respondent and substituted tt Defendant-Respondent

15.07.2015 (Plaintiff-Appellants)

24.07.2015 (Substituted l(a) to l(c) Defendant Respondents)

02.09.2016

W

hen one of the joint holders to a bank account dies the question that

inevitably arises is who is entitled to the balance held to the credit of the

account. This appeal from the District Court of Galle raises just that issue. Here is a

case where the maternal aunt of the two Plaintiff-Appellants (hereinafter sometimes

referred to as "the Plaintiffs") one Irene Somawathie Pandithasekera and her

husband Don Charles Pandithasekera) (hereinafter sometimes referred to as

2

"Panclithasekera") made a mutual last will bearing No.5214 and dated 15.01.1992 and

in respect of the will the probate was eventually issued in Case No.20, after the aunt

(the first to die of the testators) had passed away on 09.12.1994. As the two Plaintiffs

averred in their plaint, the surviving uncle Don Charles Pandithasekera himself

crossed the great divide on 26.01.1997 but the fact remains prior to his death he had

disposed of a portion of the land described in paragraph 3 of the plaint and deposited

the proceeds of sale namely a sum of Rs. 1 million in a joint "fixed deposit" at National

Savings Bank, Galle.

The Plaintiffs further stated that since the lstDefendant~one Hettiarachchige Sunny de

Alwis had been staying with an otherwise feeble uncle Pandithasekera,

Pandithasekera opened this joint account along with the rt Defendant for

transactional convenience. It was the case of the Plaintiffs that upon the death of

uncle Pandithasekera on 26.01.1997, the funds in the joint account did not vest in the

surviving account holder~the rt Defendant but rather the moneys became the

undisposed property of Pandithasekera. As the mutual will referred to above provides

for the undisposed properties of Pandithasekera at the time of his death to be vested

in the Plaintiffs (the nieces of the testators of the mutual will), the Plaintiffs averred

in their plaint that the funds in the joint account belonged to them. Thus there is a

declaration prayed for to the effect that the funds in the joint account belong to them.

In a nutshell the mutual will bearing No.5214 provided for absolute ownership of the

wife's properties to be vested in Pandithasekera upon her death and he enjoyed

absolute discretion to deal with her properties as he pleased. The mutual will also

provided that all those properties undisposed of by Pandithasekera at the time of his

death would vest in the Plaintiffs.

The joint last will contains among other things the following covenants:~

"We give and bequeath to the survivor of us all property movable and immovable that we may

own and die possessed of wheresoever situate, absolutely and without exception whatsoever.

3

The above bequests shall specifically mean and include all moneys in banks, furniture and

other movables lying in our residence at No.300, Wakwdla Road, Galle.

We have given considerable thought to the manner in which the survivor of us should finally

dispose of our assets. Whilst reiterating the bequests made earlier and not in any way

interfering with the absolute discretion given to the survivor of us to deal

with such property during hislher life/time it is our wish and desire such property should

devolve on:/

1) MRS. DANTIKA SIRlW ARDENE nee DANTIKA ABEYW ARDENE WIKREMASINGHE ofWeligama

and

2) MRS. CHINTHANIKA SENEVlRA TNE nee ABEYW ARDENE

WIKREMASINGHE of Puhuwella, our beloved nieces in equal shares, but as stated earlier

this bequest will only operate at the discretion of the survivor of us and only in the event of the

survivor's death taking place without any bequests being made during the life/time of the

survivor of us.

We do hereby appoint the survivor of us to be the executor/executrix of this Last Will and

Testament. "

As could be seen, the above will which is quite infelicitously entitled 'Joint last will"

bears the hallmarks and features of commonality with a typical mutual will wherein

two individuals, for instance a husband and wife as in this case, come together to an

agreement in the will that the first to die (wife) will leave her property to the survivor

(husband), with a further bequest that whatever is left at husband's death will

devolve on one or more ultimate beneficiaries.

] oint Will vis~a~vis a Mutual Will

A mutual will has to be contrasted with a joint will where two or more persons

execute the same document as the will of both of them. It is often said that joint wills

are lawful but not usually appropriate. The joint will operates as the separate will of

4

each testator, and either (or any) of the testators may revoke or vary the joint will so

far as it applies to them. It does not matter whether the other person is still alive or

whether they consent.

According to Caroline Sawyer and Miriam Spero in their work Succession, Wills

and Probate (Third Edition, 2015), joint wills are rare in practice and useful only

insofar as they can effectively exercise a power given to two persons jointly to appoint

by will.

In fact there is a clear distinction made between these two types of wills in Halsbury's

Laws of England (the section entitled Wills and Intestacy [Vol102~103] 2016). Whilst

paragraph 1 of Volume 102 deals with joint wills, mutual wills are discussed in

paragraph 2. The discussion therein goes as follows.

"A joint will is a will made by two or more testators contained in a single document, duly

executed by each testator, and disposing either of their separate properties1 or of their joint

property.2 It is not, however, recognised in English law as a single wile It is in effect two or

more wills, and it operates on the death of each testator as his will dispOSing of his own

separate property; on the death of the first to die it is admitted to probate as his own will and

on the death of the survivor, if no fresh will has been made, it is admitted to probate as the

disposition of the property of the survivor.4 Joint wills are now rarely, if ever, made."

Paragraph 2 of Volume 102 of Halsbury's Laws of England discusses mutual wills.

lRe Piazzi-Smyth [1898] P 7; Re Hagger, Freeman v Arscott [1930] 2 Ch 190; Re Hack (1930) 169 LT Jo 285; Re

O'Connar [1942] 1 All ER 546. In Re Stracey (1855) Oea & Sw 6, a joint will made by husband and wife operated as an exercise of the wife's power of appointment.

2Re Raine (1858) 1 Sw & Tr 144; Re Lovegrove (1862) 2 Sw & Tr 453. A dictum by Lord Mansfield in Earl of Darlington v Pulteney (1775) 1 Cowp 260 at 268, that there could not be a joint will, cannot be supported. A joint power of appointment by will may be exercised by a joint will and becomes effective on the death of the survivor, provided that at that time the will remains unaltered: Re Duddell, Roundway v Roundway [1932]1 Ch 585.

3Hobson v Blackburn and Blackburn (1822) 1 Add 274.

4Re Duddell, Roundway v Roundway [1932]1 Ch 585. See also Re Stracey (1855) Oea & Sw 6; Re Lovegrave (1862) 2 Sw & Tr 453; Re Miskelly (1869) IR 4 Eq 62; Re Fletcher (1883) 11 LR Ir 359 (where there was a separate will following and recognising a joint will); Re Crofton (1897) 13 TLR 374 (where there was a joint codicil to separate wills); Re Piazzi-Smyth [1898] P 7; Re Heys, Walker v Gaskill [1914] P 192 at 196. 5

"Wills are mutual when the testators confer on each other reciprocal benefits, which may be

absolute benefits in each other's propert/, or life interests with the same ultimate disposition

of each estate on the death of the survivor6. Apparently, a mutual will in the strict sense of the

term is a joint will, but, where by agreement or arrangement similar provisions are made by

separate wills, these are also conveniently known as mutual wills. Wills which by agreement

confer benefit on persons other than the testators, without the testators conferring benefits on

each other, can also be mutual willl Where there is an agreement not to revoke mutual wills

and one party dies having stood by the agreement, a survivor is bound by it.s"

The above discussion was necessitated because there was a misdescription by the

draftsman of the will made by Irene Somawathie Pandithasekera and Don Charles

Pandithasekera as their joint will and from the foregoing it is clear that such

misdeSCription does not detract from the fact that it was in fact a mutual will which

conferred reciprocal benefits on each other. One of the benefits was the passage of

dominium of Irene's property to her husband Don Charles Pandithasekera upon her

death and he could deal with it as his own. He did exercise the benefit by selling one

such property qua owner and made a deposit of the proceeds of sale in a joint account

but named the 1st Defendant as the other joint account holder. In fact both of them

opened the fixed deposit account on 06.03.1996.

The doctrine of mutual wills is an equitable doctrine and the creation of the Court of

Chancery. So in a nutshell, in a mutual will, the testators~as is often the case, the wife

5Stone v Hoskins [1905] P 194. There may, however, be alternative provisions in case of lapse: Re Oldham, Hadwen v

Myles [1925] Ch 75. See also Re Heys, Walker v Gaskill [1914] P 192.

6Gray v Perpetual Trustee Co Ltd [1928] AC 391, PC; Re Hagger, Freeman v Arscott [1930] 2 Ch 190; Re Green, Lindner v

Green [1951] Ch 148, [1950] 2 All ER 913.

7Re Dale, Proctor v Dale [1994] Ch 31, [1993] 4 All ER 129. See also Olins v Walters [2007] EWHC 3060 (Ch), [2008] WTLR 339, [2007] All ER (D) 291 (Dec); affd [2008] EWCA Civ 782, [2008] Ch 212, [2008] All ER (D) 58 (Jul).

8See Olins v Walters [2007] EWHC 3060, (Ch), [2008] WTLR 339, [2007] All ER (D) 291 (Dec), affd [2008] EWCA Civ 782,

[2008] Ch 212, [2008] All ER (D) 58 (Jul). See also Thomas and Agnes Carvel Foundation v Carvel [2007] EWHC 1314 (Ch), [2008] Ch 395, [2007] 4 All ER 81 (where the survivor of two people who made mutual wills, and his personal representative, were 'trustees' for the purposes of Judicial Trustees Act 1896 s 1, and a person entitled to enforce the

trust arising under the will of the first to die was a 'beneficiary', for those purposes); and Fry v Densham-Smith [2010]

EWCA Civ 1410, [2011] WTLR 387, [2010] All ER (D) 136 (Dec) (finding of existence of mutual wills agreement upheld on appeal).

6

and husband, each leave their property, usually, to the other, on the condition that the

second to die will necessarily then leave all their estate~including that of the first to

die~to an agreed third party, for example, their child.9 In the instant appeal it would

appear that the mutual testators were issueless and left the remainder of their

undisposed property, upon the death of the second to die, to their nieces namely the

Plaintiffs.

As I have made the observation, the above mutual will executed by Pandithasekera

admits of the following conclusions deducible from its covenants. Since it was the

wife who was the first to die, she agreed with her surviving husband that he would

inherit her movable and immovable property upon her death. He was conferred with

the absolute discretion to deal with her property as he pleased ~see the 3rd covenant in

the will set out above. It is this covenant that empowered Pandithasekera to dispose

of her property as his property and open a joint account with the proceeds of sale.

Pandithasekera became the owner of the properties of his wife upon her demise,

disposed of one such property and deposited the proceeds of sale in a joint account

with the 1st Defendant~Respondent.

In fact parties seem to have been cognizant of these primary facts when they made a

formal admission at the trial that Don Charles Pandithasekera became the sole owner

of all properties belonging to his wife Irene Somawathie Pandithasekera~see

admission 5 recorded on 21.04.1998. This admission is in accord with the terms of the

mutual will and as I turn to the trial, I have to point out that the respective parties in

the case did not adduce any evidence in the court a quo about the factual matrix of the

case, with the exception of a bank officer who was led by the Plaintiffs to establish

the opening of the joint account and other relevant terms of the banker customer

relationship.

9 See this explanation in Succession, Wills and Probate by Caroline Sawyer and Miriam Spero, 3'd Edition, 2015 at page 106. 7

I

}

The Issue before Court

The terse and sparse issues on either side quite rightly captured the question for

resolution~who is entitled to the money in the joint account upon the demise of one of

the joint account holders? The Plaintiffs claimed that the money in the joint account

must inure to their benefit by virtue of the covenants in the mutual will but the 1st

Defendant asserted that as a joint account holder the balance in the account should

accrue to him. The source of the claim of the Plaintiffs is traceable to the last will.

They assert that the deposit of Rs.l,OOO,OOO/~ (a sum of Rs. 1 million) which flowed

from the proceeds of sale of a land left to the uncle by the aunt should form part of the

estate of Mr. Pandithasekera when he passed away. If the sum of Rs.l million lying to

the credit of the joint account results to the estate of Pandithasekera, then the money

must accrue to them by virtue of the mutual last will. The mutual will undoubtedly

made the Plaintiffs the owners of the remainder of the property of their uncle and

aunt. That remainder, according to the Plaintiffs, included the money in the joint

fixed deposit. The title to the money did not pass to the 1st Defendant at all though he

was one of the joint account holders. This was the case of the Plaintiffs.

On the other hand, the 1st Defendant relied on a condition attached to the account

namely condition No.5 which clearly stated that in the event of death of any joint

holder the survivor/survivors will be entitled to all rights of the deceased in the joint

deposit. It is on account of this condition (the survivorship clause as it would be

called) the 1st Defendant made out his claim for the money.

The only witness called by the Plaintiffs~one Hema Ranaweera who was serving as a

bank officer of the National Savings Bank in Galle was examined by both counsel for

the parties on their respective cases. The Counsel for the Plaintiffs raised an issue ~

Issue No.9 which engaged the question of nomination which is provided for in the

specific Act~the National Savings Bank Act, No.30 of 1971 (NSB Act). Both the Civil

Procedure Code (CPC) and the National Savings Bank Act, No.30 of 1971 provide for

nominations of beneficiaries to balances lying in Bank accounts among other things.

8

It is relevant to note that there was no nomination made by Pandithasekera as to whom

the money should go upon his death. Accordingly the Issue No.9 raised on behalf of

the Plaintiffs was to the effect that since Pandithasekera had not nominated the 1st

Defendant to succeed to the money in the joint account, the 1st Defendant could not

become the owner of the money in the joint account and therefore upon the death of

Pandithasekera money in the joint account must pass to the estate of Pandithasekera.

If this issue is answered in favor of the Plaintiffs, it goes without saying that whatever

forms the estate would belong to the Plaintiffs by virtue of the last will which

contains the covenant eventuating in that result. The relevant covenant goes as

follows:

"Whilst reiterating the bequests made earlier and not in any way interfering with the

absolute discretion given to the survivor of us to deal with such property

during his/her life~time it is our wish and desire such property should devolve on:~

1) MRS. DANTIKA SIRlWARDENE nee DANTIKA ABEYW ARDENE WICKREMASINGHE ofWeligama

and

2) MRS. CHINTHANIKA SENEVlRA TNE nee ABEYW ARDENE

WIKREMASINGHE of Puhuwella, our beloved nieces in equal shares, but as stated earlier

this bequest will only operate at the discretion of the survivor of us and only in the event of the

survivor's death taking place without any bequests being made during the life~time of the

survivor of us."

Nomination of a Beneficiary to Bank Accounts

The absence of any nomination to this particular joint account figured both before the

District Court and this Court, because it was placed as an issue before the Trial Judge.

Nomination of a beneficiary has become a norm today in the case of balances lying to

the credit of an account holder and in fact it is often described as an alternative mode

of inheritance. This concept found its way into Chapter XXXVIII of the Civil

Procedure Code (CPC), which deals with testamentary actions and the pertinent

9

Section 544 was amended by Acts, No.34 of 2000, No.20 of 2002 and No.4 of 2005.

The pith and substance of the amendments is to facilitate the nomination of a person

by a deceased nominator, to become entitled to the monies, shares, movables and

insurance policies of the nominator upon the death of the nominator. An interesting

provision is Section 544(2) of the CPC which declares that a nomination under

Section 544(1) of the CPC supersedes the terms of a last will executed by the

nominator. However, as for this joint account at the National Savings Bank, the

relevant provision for making a nomination is Section 44 of the National Savings

Bank Act, N 0.30 of 1971.

An argument was thus mounted by the learned President's Counsel for the Plaintiff~

Appellants, as was done by their Senior Counsel in the District Court of Galle, that

since Don Charles Pandithasekera had not nominated his joint account holder~the 1st

Defendant as the nominee to receive the funds in the joint account upon his demise,

the terms of the last will would prevail and the money should revert to the estate of

Pandithasekera and so the bank must disburse the money to the Plaintiffs who are the

ultimate owners of the remainder of the joint estate of Pandithasekera.

Condition on the reverse of the application to open the Joint Account

What was pivotal to the decision of the learned District Judge in this case is

Condition No.5 attached to the joint account namely in the event of death of any joint

holder the survivor/survivors will be entitled to all rights of the deceased in the joint depOSit.

Because of this condition, money would belong to the 1st Defendant. Having thus

concluded, the learned District Judge dismissed the case of the Plaintiffs.

As I said before, both in the District Court and before this Court, an argument,

attractive as it was, was mounted on behalf of the Plaintiffs that failure to nominate

Sunny de Alwis~the 1st Defendant on the part of Pandithasekera in terms of Section 44

of the NSB Act would render the deposit (Rs. 1 million) chargeable with the estate of

Pandithasekera and the 1st Defendant would thus have no seisin of the money in the

joint account. This has been quite strongly urged before me.

10

Implicit in this argument is that nomination in terms of Section 44 of the NSB Act

would alone confer title to the money on the 1st Defendant. Absent nomination, in

terms of this provision, the money in the joint account will return to the estate and

the mutual will would vest the Plaintiffs with title to the money. The statute alone

would govern the relationship between National Savings Bank and the joint account

holders and there is no scope for conditions on the reverse of the application to open

the joint account to apply. In other words six conditions that appear on the reverse of

the application signed by both Pandithasekera and Sunny de Alwis are internal rules

imposed by banks and they have no application. This was the contention raised on

behalf of the Plaintiffs~Appellants, whilst on the contrary Mr. Champika

Ladduwahetty quite strenuously contended that Condition No.5 to the account

which I have already alluded to above must prevail. He argued that the money in the

joint account, after the death of Pandithasekera, was the sole property of the 1st

Defendant because of Condition No.5.

Let me set out in extenso Section 44 of the National Savings Bank Act (hereinafter

known as "the NSB Act") which deals with nominations.

"Any person over sixteen years of age who has a deposit or savings account may nominate

a person, (hereinafter called a 'nominee''), to whom the moneys lying to the credit of such

first~mentioned person (hereinafter called 'nominator') shall be paid upon his death and, ifhis

death should occur while the account exists, the moneys shall be so paid subject to the

provisions of this Act ........................... Section 44 (1)

A nomination made under subsection (1) shall have effect upon the death of the nominator

notwithstanding anything in his last will to the contrary ............. Section 44 (2)

Any nomination made under subsection (1) shall be deemed to be revoked by the death of the

nominee in the lifetime of the nominator 0 by written notice of revocation signed by the

nominator in the presence of a witness (who shall attest the signature of the nominator) or by

any subsequent nomination made by the nominator ...................... Section 44 (3)

11

The moneys lying in his deposit or savings account to the credit of the person who has made a

nomination under subsection (1) shall, in the event of his death, be deemed not to form

part of the estate or property of that person for the purpose of probate or

administration proceedings under the Civil Procedure Code, and the transfer of such

property shall not be an offence under Section 547 of that Code ....................... Section 44 (4)

No payment shall be made by the Bank to any nominee unless the nominee makes an

application supported by evidence acceptable to the Bank, in respect of his

identity ...................... Section 44 (5)

A payment made to a nominee of a deceased nominator shall be a complete discharge of the

obligations of the Bank in respect of the moneys lying to the credit of such

nominator .................. Section 44 (6)"

In fact the aforesaid provisions are substantially mirrored in Section 544 of the Civil

Procedure Code~the general enactment with its subsequent amendments passed from

time to time to Section 544, which add to the range of choses in action over which

nomination could be made.

It has to be recalled that Issue NO.9 engaged Section 44(4) of the NSB Act namely if

there is no nomination, the deposit of Rs.l million will form part of the remainder of

the estate of Pandithasekera. This issue has been answered against the Plaintiffs

giving rise to the conclusion that the money in the joint account belongs to the 1st

Defendant~joint account holder. The learned District Judge has relied exclusively on

Condition No.5 attached to the joint account.

An argument has been taken before me that whilst Section 44(2) of the NSB Act

enables a testator to alter his last will by making a nomination, this is the only

procedure that should have been employed by Pandithasekera to bequeath his deposit

to the 1st Defendant. A mere condition in the mandate namely condition No.5 ~in the

event of death of any joint holder the survivor/survivors will be entitled to all rights of the deceased in

12

f,,

!

the joint deposit, cannot transfer title of the chose in action to the rt Defendant. The

resolution of this argument would dispose of the issue before me.

Issue of Banking Law

I would look upon the issue before me as a question engaging banking law and once

Pandithasekera disposed of his property (sic) and deposited a sum of Rs.l,OOO,OOO

(Rs.l million) in a fixed deposit with the 1st Defendant as a joint account holder,

banking law would begin to take over the relationship between the parties.

It is worth bearing in mind Section 3 of the Civil Law Ordinance No.5 of 1852 which

enacts:

"In all questions or issues which may hereafter arise or which may have to be decided in Sri

Lanka with respect to the law of banks and banking, the law to be administered shall be the

same as would be administered in England in the like case, at the corresponding period if such

question or issue had arisen or had to be decided in England, unless in any case other provision

is or shall be made by any enactment now in force in Sri Lanka or hereafter to be enacted."

So if a question of banking law in respect of banks and banking arises before this

Court at the present time, one has to look to the English law which is administered at

the corresponding period in a like case, unless of course provision has been made in a

domestic enactment on the same issue. The issue in this case is who succeeds to the

money in the joint account when one of the joint account holders who is the sole

contributor to the deposit has passed away. No doubt there is a domestic enactment'

Section 44 of the National Savings Bank Act that provides for a procedure to

nominate a beneficiary but I hasten to point out that this is not the only and exclusive

method for choosing a beneficiary to one's joint account, particularly in a situation

where the sole contributor to the deposit is just one joint account holder like

Pandithasekera. Pandithasekera's right to nominate a beneficiary in terms of Section

44 of the NSB Act is only discretionary as Section 44(1) of the NSB Act quite clearly

declares,"Any person over sixteen years of age who has a depOSit or savings account may

nominate a person ...... ".

13

It is not mandatory that Panclithasekera should have exercised his right under Section

44 of the NSB Act to constitute the 1st Defendant as a beneficiary to receive the sum of

Rs.1 million which he alone paid in. If banking law permits him to make a devolution

or provides for an alternative mode of transfer of title to the money in the joint

account, it is not inconsistent with the domestic legislation to recognize such

alternative modes of devolution of the joint account balance as the principle of

survivorship which figures in this case. It has to be recognized that statutory law is

not the only source of banking law in this country.

As Ungoed~ Thomas J. stated quite pertinently in Seiangor United Rubber Estates v.

Cradock (No 3) [1968] 1 WLR 1555 at 1607:

"Banking law is not a separate body of law, though, like innumerable other activities, it has

statutory provisions dealing exclusively with it, and, being a distinctive and important

activity, textbooks dealing separately with it. Those aspects of law with which we are at

present concerned are aspects of the general law of contract applicable to banking. The

principles of that law of contract applicable to banking are the principles of the general law of

contract. ,,10

Apart from many other sources which feed into a banker~customer relationship such

as tort, equity and trust and personal laws, having regard to the facts and

circumstances of the particular banker~customer relationship, the law of contracts

also plays a significant role in the relationship between a customer and his bank and

when Panclithasekera and Sunny de Alwis opened the joint account on 06.03.1993 at

the National Savings Bank, a contractual nexus of creditor and debtor was

established between them and the bank and the Privy Council explained the

relationship in the well known Hong Kong appeal case of T ai Hing Cotton Mill v. liu Chong Hing Bank Ltd (1986) AC 80:

10 See an interesting article by Ross Cranston "Understanding Banking Law" (1988) LMCLQ 360. 14

There is a debt (a chose in action) which is created when a bank account is opened

and the deposit by the customer is owed to the customer by the bank, payable on

demand~for comparable dicta on the nature of the customary banker~customer

relationship see seminal cases such as Foley v. HiD (1848) 2 HLC 28 (HL) and

joachimson v. Swiss Bank Corporation (1921) 3 KB 110 (CA). Then the question

arises what happens when a joint account is opened?

There is considerable authority for the view that Pandithasekera and Sunny de Alwis

jointly held the legal title to the chose in action~see the Australian case of RusseD v.

Scott (1936) 55 C.L.R 440; Fadden v. Deputy Federal Commissioner of Taxation

(1943) 68 C.L.R 76; Croton v. R. (1967) 41 AL.J.R.289 (RCA); McEvoy v. The Beffast

Banking Company (1935) AC.24; Hirschorn v. Evans (Barclays Bank Ltd,

Garnishee) (1938) 3 All E.R.491, 495; In fact in Hirschorn v. Evans (supra), the

English Court of Appeal held that the funds in the joint account are owned by both

account holders jointly and the funds cannot be seized to satisfy a debt owed by one

of them individually. This was a case where a husband and wife maintained a joint

account, but the garnishee order was only against the husband. In Hirschorn the

joint account was a cheque account where either the husband or wife could draw a

cheque and make a demand on the chose in action.

Operating Instructions ~ Either/or

The appeal before me involves a fixed deposit account but withdrawals could be

made either by Pandithasekera or Sunny de Alwis~the 1st Defendant. The

commonality between the case of Hirschorn and the appeal before me is that both

were joint accounts where the mandate under which the joint account holders

operated the accounts provided for the respective banks to act on the sole signature of

either account holder~vide the joint application made by both Pandithasekera and

Sunny de Alwis where the operating instruction was to permit withdrawals by either

party. This prOvides an item of evidence for me to conclude that Sunny de Alwis was

not a mere volunteer to the account but had full control of the balances on his own.

This is a point missed by the learned District Judge. The Courts have also posed a

15

question whether the funds in a joint account is held by the surviving account holder

for the benefit of the estate of the deceased account holder.

This question was addressed by the High Court of Australia in Russell v. Scott

(1936) 55 CLR 440. In this case an aunt opened a joint account with her nephew. She

supplied all of the funds for the account and during her lifetime the account was used

solely for her support.

When the account was opened, the aunt had told the nephew and others that the

balance remaining in the account at her death would belong to him.

The High Court of Australia found that the aunt intended the nephew to take

beneficially whatever remained in the account at the date of her death.

The High Court held that the aunt had, during her lifetime, vested the legal right to

the debt in the nephew including the legal right to take by survivorship on her death.

Since however, she had provided all of the funds for the account, the Court held that

there arose a presumption of resulting trust in her favour. The real question was

whether the presumption had been rebutted.

The High Court held that, in relation to the balance of the account at her death, the

presumption of resulting trust was rebutted and that, upon the aunt's death, the

principle of survivorship interest in the account passed to the nephew.

Dixon and Evatt JJ, at 451, succinctly dealt with this issue thus:~

"The right at law to the balance standing at the credit of the account on the death of the aunt

was thus vested in the nephew. The claim that it forms part of her estate must depend upon

equity. It must depend upon the existence of an equitable obligation making him a trustee for

the estate. What makes him a trustee of the legal right which survives to him? It is true a

presumption that he is a trustee is raised by the fact of his aunt's supplying the money that gave

the legal right a value. As the relationship between them was not such as to raise a

presumption of advancement, prima facie there is a resulting trust. But that is a mere question

of onus of proof The presumption of resulting trust does no more than call for proof of an

16

intention to confer beneficial ownership; and in the present case satisfactory proof is

forthcoming that one purpose of the transaction was to confer upon the nephew the beneficial

owner ship of the sum standing at the credit of the account when the aunt died. ...

Doubtless a trustee [the nephew] was during her lifetime, but the resulting trust upon which he

held did not extend further than the donor intended; it did not exhaust the entire legal interest

in every contingency. In the contingency of his surviving the donor and of the account then

containing money, his legal interest was allowed to take effect unfettered by a trust. In respect

of his jus accrescendi his conscience could not be bound. For the resulting trust would be

inconsistent with the true intention of that person upon whose presumed purpose it must

depend."

The fact that one of the joint account holders did not contribute to, nor draw upon,

the joint account does not prevent that person from having a beneficial interest. Nor

does it matter that that person did not even know of the existence of the joint

account: Standing v. Bowring (1885) 31 Ch. D 282; Russell v. Scott (1936) 55 CLR

440, at 453 (citing Re Harrison (1920) 90 L.J.Ch. 186). Nor does it matter that that

person was never intended to use the account while the other account holder was

alive prevent the former from succeeding to the whole account by survivorship.

In Russell v. Scott, ante, Miss Russell, who was very wealthy, had a bank account at

the Commonwealth Savings Bank. She and her nephew opened a joint account with

the bank by the transfer of a large sum from her account. The joint account was kept

in funds by payments from her investments, and it was used solely for her needs. The

nephew withdrew money for this purpose with withdrawal slips signed by himself

and his aunt. The nephew did not contribute to the account. When the account was

opened Miss Russell told the nephew and others that any balance remaining in the

account at her death would belong to the nephew, and it was found that she intended

him to take whatever balance stood to the credit of the account at her death. The

similarities between Russell v Scott and this case are striking. Whilst the aunt in

RusseUmade a declaration that the money in the joint account upon her death would

17

\,

III!

\ft iIiI;

I

belong to the nephew, the mandate in the joint bank account Condition No.5

declared "in the event of death of any joint holder the survivor/survivors will be entitled to all rights

of the deceased in the joint deposit". Thus in my view that the presumption of a resulting

trust in Mr. Pandithasekera's favour (and therefore of his estate) was rebutted, and

that Hettiarachchige Sunny de Alwis-the 1st Defendant would become entitled to the

balance on the joint account by survivorship.

The doctrine of survivorship evinced by Condition No.5 attached to the joint account

rebuts the presumption of a resulting trust arising in favor of the estate of

Pandithasekera. I would thus summarize my conclusions as to the right of Sunny de

Alwis-the 1st Defendant to receive the funds outstanding in the joint account.

1. The claim of the plaintiffs that the balance standing at the credit of the joint

account on the death of Pandithasekera forms part of his estate must depend

upon equity.

2. It must depend upon the existence of an equitable obligation making the 1st

defendant (the surviving joint account holder) a trustee for the estate.

3. What makes him a trustee of the balance even though the legal title is in him?

It is through a presumption of trust that is raised by the fact of Pandithasekera

supplying the money that gave the legal right a value (Rs.l million).

4. As the relationship between Mr. Pandithasekera and Sunny de Alwis was not

such as to raise a presumption of advancement, prima facie there would arise a

presumption of resulting trust.

S. In the appeal before me I find that satisfactory proof has been adduced that

Pandithasekera intended to confer upon Sunny de Alwis the beneficial

ownership of the sum standing at the credit of the account when he passed

away. Opening the account with operating instructions "Either of us could operate

the account" is emblematic of that intention. Moreover Condition No.5 attached

to the account declares that the survivor takes the balance.

18

\I!i iI! t

,

~

if

,

~f

I

~I

As I cited Dixon and Evatt JJ in RusseD v. Scott (supra), the right at law to the balance

standing at the credit of the account on the death of one joint account holder was vested in the

surviving account holder Sunny de Alwis. As a legal right exists in him to the sum of

money, what equity is there defeating the intention that he should enjoy the legal

right beneficially? Both upon principle and law I answer, none. Both the legal right

and the beneficial interest in the money standing at the credit of the joint account

have vested in Sunny de Alwis-the 1st Defendant and thus I proceed to affirm the

judgment of the learned District Judge of Galle dated 23.06.2000.

Accordingly I would dismiss the appeal of the Plaintiff-Appellants.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

19

I

t I ,

t! ! (