IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

C.A. No. 1153(2000(F)

D.C. Kalmunai No. 2128/L

la. Indrasiri Jayawickrema, 1b. Champa Priyangani Jayawiekrema, Ie. Nihal Dayananda Jayawickrema 2. Appukutty Kankanamalage Kusumawathi 3. Indrasiri Jayawickrema 4. Nihal Dayananda Jayawickrema 5. Champa Priyangani Jayawiekrema, All of Main Street, Pottuvil.

Defendant-Appellants

Vs.

1. Punchi Hewage Eddie de Silva 2a. Washini Theeshana Dilanthika de Silva 3a. Lakshan Rananjaya de Silva 2. Punehi Hewage Rukmani de Silva 3. Punehi Hewage Pemadasa de Silva 4. Punehi Hewage Sunil de Silva 5. Punehi Hewage Ranjith de Silva

1

6. Punchi Hewage Dayawathi de Silva 7. Punehi Hewage Nandana Chandralatha de Silva 8. Punehi Hewage Anura de Silva

***********

All of Kusuma Rice Mill, Potuvil Plaintiff-Respondents

" ,I f

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

M.M.A.GAFOOR, J. & JANAK DE SILV A, J.

Rohan Sahabandu P.C. with H. Amarasinghe for the Defendant-Appellants. U.L.A. Majeed for the Plaintiff-Respondents.

12-09-2017. WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS TENDERED ON :

DECIDED ON

M.M.A.GAFOOR, J.

10-11-2017(By the respondents) 12-03-2018(By the appellants)

30th May,2018

**********

2

The Plaintiff-Respondents in this case instituted the above

numbered and styled action in the District Court of Kalmunai against the

Defendant-Appellants by plaint dated 22.03.1995, averring inter alia, that

Vidana Gamage Premawathy alias Kusumawathy Jayawickrema, mother

of the Plaintiff-Respondents and her brother the 1st Defendant-Appellant

owned and possessed in common a land described in schedule A to the

plaint and they entered into an executed a deed of partition No. 3021 dated

30,03.1984, whereby the allotted northern half of the portion of that land

described in schedule B to the plaint to the said Premawathy alias

Kusumawathy and southern half portion of it to the 1st Defendant-

Appellant.

3

According to the answer daled 26.07.1995, the Defendant-Appellants

admitting the said deed of partition and the said Respondents or

Premawaly alias Kusumawathy never possessed the said northern half

portion and that they had possessed the whole land for a long time and

had prescribed title to the said northern portion as well. The Plaintiff-

Respondents in their plaint further averred that the 15t Defendant-

Appellant for the first time in the 1st week of August 1994 tried to prevent

the Plaintiff-Respondent from entering the land. This content was denied

by the Appellants in their answer.

The Plaintiff-Respondents also averred that a case No.15683 under

section 66 of the Primary Court Procedure Act in the Magistrate's Court of

Akkaraipattu and the order was made therein placing the 1st Defendant-

Appellant in possession. This was admitted by the Defendant-Appellants.

The Plaintiff-Respondents prayed for declaration of title in their

favour and ejectment of the Defendant-Appellants from the land and

damages and costs. The Defendant-Appellants opposed to this and

prayed for dismissal of the action with costs.

The case went for trial and after the conclusion of the evidence, both

parties tendered their written submissions and the judgment was

delivered on 08.11.2000, in favour of the Plaintiff-Respondents as prayed

for in their plaint.

4

Being aggrieved and dissatisfied with the said judgment dated

08.11.2000, this appeal was filed by the Defendant-Appellants in order to

quash and set aside the said judgment dated 08.11.2000.

And also the Defendant-Appellants in their petition stated that

a) The said judgment is contrary to law and the weight of evidence

in the case,

b) The learned District Judge non-directed himself to the

contradiction between the averment in paragraph 7 of the plaint

that for the first time the 1st Defendant-Appellant in the 1st week

of August 1994 tried to prevent the Plaintiff-Respondents from

entering the said land and the 1st Plaintiff-Respondent's evidence

that the 1st Defendant-Appellant in 1994 attempted to erect a hut

on the land and he prevented it and such non direction amounts

to a misdirection in law,

c) The learned District Judge non-directed himself to the 3

contradictions between the 1st Plaintiff-Respondent's evidence

that he prevented the 1st Defendant-Appellant from erecting a

hut on the land and the Plaintiff-Respondents' witness

Arulampalam Sathananthan that in or about 1993 the 1st

Defendant-Appellant erected a shop on the land and let it to a

returned refugee, and such non-direction amounts to a

misdirection in law,

5

d) The learned District Judge has failed to draw the correct

inferences or drawn wrong inferences from the evidence and this

amounts to an error of law.

The Plaintiff-Respondents in their answer averred the land more-

fully described in schedule A to the plaint is in extent of 44 perches was

owned and possessed jointly by Premawathy alias Kusumawathy

Jayawickrema, the Plaintiff-Respondent's mother and her younger brother

Dhanapala Jayawickrema, the 1st Defendant-Appellant since 1939.

By deed of partition bearing No.3021 was admitted by both parties

and the said land was amicably partitioned and divided to the said

Kusumawathy Jayawickrema that the Respondents' mother and her

brother Dhanapala Jayawickrema, the 1st Defendant-Appellant. According

to. said Kusumawathy Jayawickrema, she became the absolute owner of

the northern half share of 22 perches morefully described in schedule B

to the plaint, and the said Dhanapala Jayawickrema, the 1st Defendant-

Appellant above named, became the absolute owner of the southern

portion in extent of 22 perches morefully described in schedule B to the

plaint.

In the evidence in this case, southern portion has a building and a

hOllse where the 1st Defendant resides with his family and the northern

portion is a bare land which contain a well and some coconut trees. The

G

Plaintiffs' mother Kusumawathy did not live there but possessed the land

bv using the well and plucking coconuts from trees in her portion of the

Iclnd until she died in 1987. She died in 1987 due to terrorist attack on a bus

yvhich she travelled. After Kusumawathy's death her children 1st to 10th

Plaintiff-Respondents became entitled to the said land by inheritance and

possessed the said portion.

Since the Sinhalese people in the Pothuvil area were subjected L TIE

terrorist attack in 1987 some of them left the area including the 1st

Defendant and they came back there to resettle in the latter part of 1993.

The 1st Defendant and his children who came back in the latter part of 1993

without any right or title to the land in dispute which is morefully

described in the schedule B to the plaint surreptitiously tried to put up a

boutique in 1994. The 1st Plaintiff when came to know about the unlawful

act, lodged a complaint with the Pothuvil Police to prevent the Defendant

from proceeding with the work and that the Plaintiff also instituted an

action under section 66 of the Primary Court Procedure Act in the Primary

Court of Akkaraipattu. The Primary Court advised the 1st Plaintiff to seek

civil remedy and ordered the 1st Defendant not to erect any building on

the said land and the Plaintiff instituted rei -vindicatio action in the District

Court of Kalmunai praying for declaration of title and ejectment of

defendant and damages and cost.

After trial, the learned District Judge entered the judgment on

08.11.2000 declaring the plaintiff is entitled to the land morefully described

7

in schedule B to the plaint and ejectment of the defendant and all others

from the said portion of the land.

Therefore, damages and cost prayed for him in the plaint, the

Defendant preferred this appeal against the said judgment. The following

admissions are recorded at the commencement of the trial in the District

Court (Kalmunai).

a. The property described in schedule A in the plaint was in possession of Vithanagamage Premawathy alias Kusumawathy Jayawickrema and Dhanapala Jayawickrema initially.

b. By Deed of partition bearing No.3021 dated 30.03.1984 Vithanagamage Premawathy became the owner of the divided northern portion of property described in schedule B.

c. The case bearing No. 15683 was between the 1st Plaintiff and the 1st Defendant at the Primary Court of Akkaraipattu in connection with this land.

d. Possession of the land was granted to the 1st Defendant in accordance with the judgment delivered in the Primary Court of Akkaraipattu in case bearing No. 15683 on 06.12.1994.

The Defendant stated in his evidence that Kusumawathy and the 1st

Defendant maintained a cordial relationship between them and owned

and possessed their respective lots without any dispute until 1987 in

which year the said Kusumawathy died due to shooting incident in a bus

by the LTTE Terrorists. After the death of said Kusumawathy, her

children 1st to 10lh Plaintiffs in this case became enti tied to the said land.

8

The 4th Defendant admitted in his evidence that up to the time of

the Plaintiffs' mother and also the 15t Plaintiff under cross-examination

stated that he made a complaint in respect of the land in dispute to the

police station in August 1994. And before this date he did not make any

complaint against the 1st Defendant. This evidence is not contradicted and

at page 52 of the brief emphasis and also it is to be noted that the 1st

Defendant is the uncle of the 1st to 10th Plaintiffs without any crime or

reason and for the first time in the 1st week of August 1994 tried to put up

a boutique on the land in dispute and thereby prevented the plaintiffs

from process in the said land in which disaster in proceedings initiated

under Section 66 of the Primary Court Procedure Act in the Primary Court

of Akkaraipattu and the 1st Plaintiff was advised to file a civil action to

indicate his rights to the said land.

Then the action of declaration of title to the land by the Plaintiff for

the ejectment of the defendant was initiated. The title of the ownership for

the Plaintiff's land in dispute has been admitted by the Defendant without

any dispute.

The case was proceeded to trail for the following issues,

Issue No.3

Whether the Plaintiff become entitled to the land described in schedule B (Northern side) by deed of partition No.3021

9

Issue No.6

Whether the Plaintiffs are entitled to reliefs as prayed for In the plaint?

Issue No.7

Whether the Defendants had prescribed to the land morefully described in schedule A including B.

Issue No.8

In that case whether the Plaintiff's action has to be dismissed?

The only question that was placed before this Court is whether

the Defendant has continuous prescriptive possession of 10 years as

claimed by them against the title of the Plaintiff from a certain date.

Issue No.7 refers the continuous, uninterrupted, undisturbed and

unencumbered possession of the said land described in schedule A to the

plaint including schedule B to the plaint for more than 10 years.

VVhen an issue relating to the adverse, possession over 10 years is

raised by a defendant as against the legal title of the Plaintiff is an

important requirement in law that he must prove his 10 years period

commence to run. If this is not clearly proved in his statement that he has

10 years period, is liable to be rejected.

10

In the case of Dingiri Appu V. Mohotti 68 NLH. page 40 Basnayake

C) held inter alia that /I Where a land is owned in com1110n, there must be clear

evidence of ouster of all the other co-owners, by the c-muller who claims that lIe

enjoyed the land exclusively without recognizing the rights of others"

In the case of Wickremaratne and Another V. Alpenis Perera -SLH.

190, Vol. 1 1986 Chief Justice G.P.5. de Silva held that, " il1 a partition

action for a lot of land claimed by the plaintiff to be a divided portion of a larger

land, he 111ust adduce proof that the co-owner who originated the division and such

co-owner's successors had prescribed to that divided portion by adverse

possession for at least ten years fro111 the date of ouster or something equivalent

to olister. Where such co-owner had hi111self executed deeds for undivided shares

of the larger land after the year of alleged dividing off it will 11lilitate against the

plea of prescription. Possession of divided portions by different co-owners is in no

way inconsistent with C0111111011 possession.

A co-owner's possession is in law the possession of the co-owners every co-

owner is presumed to be in possession in his capacity as co-owner. A co-owner

cannot put an end to his possession as co-owner by a secret intention in his

mind. Nothing short of ouster or something equivalent to ouster could bring

about that result./I

In Corea v. Appuhamy Et. AI. (1911) 15 NLH. 65 the Privy Council

decision laid down for the first time in clear and authoritative terms of

the following principles:

11

1. The possession of one co-owner, was in law, the possession of others,

2. Every co-owner must be presumed to be possessing III that capacity,

3. It was not possible for such a co-owner to put an end to that title and to initiate a prescriptive title by any secret intention in his own mind and

4. That nothing short of an ouster, could bring about that result.

And <lIso in the case of Ponnambalam V. Waidyalingam and others

1978/1979 2 SLR pg. 166 Ranasinghe J. in his land mark judgment

observed as follows:

"the termination of co m1l1 011 ownership 'lvit1lOut the express consent

of all other co-owners could fake place where one or more parties

either a complete stranger or even one who is in the pedigree claim

tlIat they have prescribed to ei ther the en ti ty or specific portion of

com111on land such a termination could taken place only on the basis

of unbroken and uninterrupted and adverse possession by such

claim and or claimants at least 10 years the emphasis mine"

In the above mentioned case there is no evidence that the

defendant's possession commences from 1984. There is evidence that up to

1984 the Plaintiff's mother has been in exclusive possession of the said

land in 1987 or Sinhalese people in Pothuvil including the Defendant's

family equated in some safe areas due to terrorists attack and returned

only ill the later part of 1993. So: between 1983 and 1993 the Defendant

could not possess in this land.

,,-S7

12

It is also admitted that all parties in this case arc living in Pothuvil

anI I the land in dispute also situated in Pothuvil.

Therefore, there was no dispute until 1987 and only in August 1994 ,

the dispute arose for the first time. Before 1994 there was no problem

between families of Plaintiff and the Defendant and they lived in friendly

manner and in visiting terms.

If there had been any dispute existed over this land before 1994 the

Plaintiffs might have gone to the Police or Court as they did now.

Therefore, it is clearly established that the dispute arose only in August

1994 when the Defendants started to construct the building in the

Plaintiffs' land.

This fact is admitted by the 4th Defendant in his evidence. In the

evidence of the 4th Defendant he has testified that" only in August 1994

the dispute arose between my father and the 1st Plaintiff. When the

Plaintiffs' mother died we all lived happily. In 1984, the full land was

divided between my father and the aunt, which my father had admitted".

Therefore, evidence of the 4th Defendant and the 1st Plaintiff is very

important in the connection with the 10 years prescriptive title.

-----

13

According to the evidence led in this case, the bnd in qUl'sliol1ed is

a bare land with 11 coconut trees standing thereon. It is situated at a short

distance from the place wlwre the 1st Plaintiff lives. But it is situated

adjacent to the Defendants' land. It is easy to pluck some coconut on the

slight without the knowledge of the Plaintiff the occasional secret plucking

of the coconut from the Plaintiffs'land.

According to the decided cases of Corea V, Iseris Appuhamy 15

NLR 65, Wickramaratne and another V. Alpenis Perera -5LR -190, Vol.1

of 1986 it is to be noted that the evidence without any details with the

people possessed the land is insufficient to satisfy that there was a

possession of the meaning of Section 3 of the Prescription Ordinance.

And also in the cases of Romanis V. 5iwethappu 68 CLR, 40,

Hassan V. Romanishamy 66 CLW 112, Basanayake CJ said that a mere

statement of a wih1ess 1 possess the land or we possessed the land and I

planted bushes and also vegetables are not sufficient to entitle him to a

decree under Section 3 of the Prescription Ordinance.

The learned trial judge in his judgment has taken into consideration

the fact of goodwill and the friendly relationship prevailed between the

two families prior to 1987. It that to be so, adverse possession of the

Plaintiffs' land by the Defendants and that only the Defendants try to

,

(

""."-'-- -_. __ .,----

14

construct the boutique in August 1994 dispute arose and therefore the

Defendants would not have the 10 years possession against the Plaintiffs.

For the above reasons the appeal is dismissed with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JANAK DE SIL V A, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL