==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/260-261/24

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: 1. Mathagadeera Arachchige Saliya

CA/HCC/0260-261/2024 Kumara

High Court of Colombo 2. Mathagadeera Arachchige Manjula

Case No: HC/37/2018 Kumara

Accused-Appellants

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

Complainant-Respondent

NOW BETWEEN

Mathagadeera Arachchige Saliya

Kumara

1st Accused-Appellant

CA/HCC/260-261/24

2 | P a g e

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

Complainant-Respondent

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Ershan Ariaratnam for the 1st Appellant.

Neranjan Jayasinghe for the 2nd Appellant.

Sudharshana De Silva, PC, ASG for the

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 01/12/2025

DECIDED ON : 09/02/2026

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellants (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellants) were indicted by the Attorney General in the High Court of

Colombo as follows:

CA/HCC/260-261/24

3 | P a g e

1. Against the 1st Appellant for executing a transaction that is buying a

van No. WP PE 9148 from proceeds of crime of Heroin Trafficking

punishable under Section 3(1) of the Prevention of Money Laundering

Act No. 05 of 2006 as amended by Act No. 40 of 2011.

2. Against both the Appellants for executing a transaction that is buying

a van No. WP PE 4556 from proceeds of crime of Heroin Trafficking

punishable under Section 3(1) of the Prevention of Money Laundering

Act No. 05 of 2006 as amended by Act No. 40 of 2011.

Following the conclusion of the trial, the 1st Appellant was found guilty for

the 1st count and was sentenced to 7 years rigorous imprisonment.

For the second count only, the 2nd Appellant was found guilty to the second

charge and was sentenced to 7 years rigorous imprisonment. The 1st

Appellant was acquitted from the second count.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellants

preferred this appeal to this court.

The learned Counsel for the Appellants informed this court that the

Appellants have given consent to argue this matter in their absence. At the

hearing, the Appellants were connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

Before commencement of the argument, the learned Counsel for the 2nd

Appellant brought to the notice of this Court that his client, the 2nd Appellant

is willing to withdraw his appeal subject to back dating the sentence. Upon

withdrawal, the appeal of the Appellant is dismissed.

Hence, this appeal is only considered against the 1st Appellant. (Hereinafter,

referred to as the Appellant).

The following Grounds of Appeal were raised on behalf of the Appellant:

1. The learned High Court Judge has failed to consider the elements of the

charge being proved.

CA/HCC/260-261/24

4 | P a g e

2. The learned High Court Judge has cast un warranted burden of proof

on the Appellant to disprove the prosecution case.

Background of the case albeit briefly is as follows:

The Appellant was indicted under Section 3(1) of the Money Laundering Act

for purchasing a vehicle valued at Rs.4.5 million, which he was unable to

explain as to how he came to be in possession of.

According to PW1, Manager-Recovery of the Singer Finance Company,

confirmed that the Appellant had obtained a leasing facility for

Rs.2,000,000/- for the vehicle No. WP PE 9148 on 25.08.2014. He had

submitted an application which was marked as P1 during the trial. The

vehicle was valued at Rs.5,000,000/- and the Appellant had paid

Rs.3,000,000/- to the owner. On 28.11.2014 the Appellant had paid

Rs.15,038,200/- and entered into another lease for the balance

Rs.518,000/-.

Under cross examination, PW1 admitted that his company had checked the

re-payment capacity of the Appellant and the purpose of buying the vehicle.

PW3 was the driver of the Appellant worked for 1.5 months. The vehicle WP

PE 9148 was given on rent to a firm called Kangaroo Cabs.

PW4, the mother of the Appellant had stated that when she went abroad, the

Appellant was only 15 years old. She had worked for 8 years and the

Appellant had been working in a poultry farm. Later the Appellant had

engaged in business related to coconut trade using a lorry bought by PW2.

Later then, she sold the vehicle for Rs.1,300,000/- and given the money to

the Appellant. After he got married, she had bought a van for him. She was

not aware about the income and other properties obtained by the Appellant.

But she admitted that she knew of an existing drug case in Colombo and

several cases in Gampaha against the Appellant.

CA/HCC/260-261/24

5 | P a g e

PW7, the Grama Sevaka of the area could remember the Appellant selling

coconut using a small lorry. The Grama Sevaka too admitted that she knew

about the existing cases against the Appellant and she had given evidence in

one of the cases.

PW5, the investigating officer, had given evidence and submitted a document

marked as P8 which contained the previous records of the Appellant. The

investigation pertaining to the Appellant only revealed his coconut business.

The witnesses had mentioned that the Appellant had two properties, one in

Gampaha and the other in Kandy. During the investigation, he had failed to

provide details about the income. The vehicle in issue was taken into police

custody.

The Appellant in his dock statement stated that he had worked for 5 years

in a poultry farm. In 2004, his mother had bought a lorry for him to carry

out his business. He had done his coconut business for 4 years using the

said lorry. He admitted that he had bought a van using a leasing facility and

by paying Rs.3,000,000/- of his money, and by paying Rs. 1500000/- three

months later, using money received from his wife. He admitted that he was

arrested by the Police Narcotics Bureau for possession of Heroin in the year

2012.

In criminal cases, the prosecution bears the burden of proving the case

against the accused person beyond a reasonable doubt. Notably, this burden

shifts only in specific circumstances. Therefore, the accused does not usually

bear the burden to prove his case unless he pleads a general or specific

exception under the Penal Code.

In the case of Mohamed Nimnaz V. Attorney General CA/95/94 it was held

that:

“A criminal case has to be proved beyond reasonable doubt. Although

we take serious view in regard to offences in relation to drugs, we are

CA/HCC/260-261/24

6 | P a g e

of the view that the prosecutor should not be given a second chance to

fill the gaps of badly handled prosecutions….”

In the Attorney-General v. Rawther 25 NLR 385, Ennis, J. states: [1987] 1

SLR 155

"The evidence must establish the guilt of the accused, not his innocence.

His innocence is presumed in law, from the start of the case, and his

guilt must be established beyond a reasonable doubt”.

In Miller v. Minister of Pensions (1947) 2 All E.R. 372 the court held that:

“the evidence must reach the same degree of cogency as is required in

a criminal case before an accused person is found guilty. That degree is

well settled. It need not reach certainty, but it must carry high degree of

probability. Proof beyond reasonable doubt does not mean proof beyond

the shadow of a doubt. The law would fail to protect the community if it

admitted fanciful possibilities to deflect the course of justice. If the

evidence is so strong against a man as to leave only a remote possibility

in his favour which can be dismissed with the sentence, “of course it is

possible, but not in the least probable,” the case is proved beyond

reasonable doubt, but nothing short of that will suffice”.

In the case of Sivathasan vs. Attorney General (2021) 02 SLR 290 it was

held:

“A reasonable doubt is a real or actual and a substantial doubt, as

opposed to an imaginary or flimsy doubt that may arise in the mind of the

decider of facts (judge or the jury, as the case may be), following an

objective consideration of all the attendant facts and circumstances.

CA/HCC/260-261/24

7 | P a g e

The principle that the prosecution must prove its case beyond reasonable

doubt and the accused is entitled to an acquittal if there exists a

reasonable doubt, has been engraved in the criminal justice system of this

country and in the rest of the common law world. That is to ensure that

only those actually guilty of having committed crimes are convicted and

the innocent are acquitted. Thus, the application of this principle should

cause the advancement of the primary objective of criminal justice (that

being ‘the conviction of the guilty through a lawful and fair trial and if

found guilty the imposition of an appropriate punishment, and the acquittal

of the innocent) and not frustrate it.”

In a case of Money Laundering, the prosecution has to establish the known

income and the alleged expenditure of the Accused during the material

period. When the prosecution establishes the income and the expenditure of

an Accused during the said period, he or she must establish that he or she

had means for such expenditure to a standard of balance of probabilities. In

this regard, Section 4 of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act No. 5 of

2006 come into operation.

Section 4 of the Act states:

For the purpose of any proceedings under this Act, it shall be deemed

until the contrary is proved, that any movable or immovable property

acquired by a person has been derived or realized directly or indirectly

from any unlawful activity, or are the proceeds of any unlawful activity,

if such property-

a) Being money, cannot be or could not have been-

i. part of the known income or receipts of such person; or

ii. money to which his known income or receipts has or had

been converted; or

CA/HCC/260-261/24

8 | P a g e

b) being property other than money, cannot be or could not have

been;

i. property acquired with any part of his known income or

receipts; and

ii. property which is or was part of his known income or

receipts; and

iii. property to which is any part of his known income or

receipts has or had been converted.

Under the first ground of appeal, the Appellant contends that the learned

High Court Judge failed to consider the elements of the charge being proved.

The learned Counsel for the Appellant contends that the leasing facility was

granted to the Appellant after duly assessing the re-payment ability of the

Appellant. Further, the Appellant had been financially supported by his

mother and his wife during the said period.

At the time of the argument, a document which was marked as P8 was not

included in the brief. This document contained the details of cases, both

previous and pending, reported against the Appellant. A copy of the same

was provided to this Court by the Learned Additional Solicitor General. The

learned Counsel for the Appellant contends that great prejudice has been

caused to the Appellant by leading unrelated convictions without direct proof

of involvement in large scale drug operations, which risks diverting the

Court’s focus from the specific charges at hand.

Section 54 of the Evidence Ordinance states:

In criminal proceedings the fact that the accused person has a bad

character is irrelevant, unless evidence has been given that he has a good

character, in which case it becomes relevant.

CA/HCC/260-261/24

9 | P a g e

Explanation 1.- This section does not apply to cases in which the bad

character of any person is itself a fact in issue.

Explanation 2.- A previous conviction is relevant as evidence of bad

character in such case.

In D. W. Wanigasekara v The Republic of Sri Lanka [177-78] 1 SLR 241

the Court held:

“(1) That the ‘basic fact’ to be proved was that the accused acquired

property which could not have been acquired with any part of his sources

of income or receipts known to the prosecution after investigation and that

the prosecution is not required to prove that the acquisitions were made

with income or receipts from bribery. An interpretation based on the

appellant’s contention would defeat the very purpose for which the section

was included in the Bribery Act since section 23A is designed against a

person in respect of whom there is no proof of the actual receipt of a

gratification, but there is presumptive evidence of bribery.”

In the case of Director-General, Commission to Investigate Allegations

of Bribery v. S. B. Dissanayake (2005) 2 SLR 393, it was held:

“The burden is on the prosecution to prove the 'basic fact' that the known

income of the Accused Respondent was less than that of his known

expenditure during the alleged period, that the accused respondent

acquired property which cannot or could not have been acquired with any

part of his income during the said period.”

As the evidence led in the trial falls clearly within the legal frame work, the

contention raised by the Appellant is not tenable in this case. For these

reasons, the first ground of appeal cannot be sustained.

Considering the second ground of appeal, the learned Counsel for the

Appellant argues, that the learned High Court Judge misdirected himself by

failing to consider the plausibility of the Appellant’s explanation to rebut the

CA/HCC/260-261/24

10 | P a g e

presumption, within the perspective of the socio-economic standing of the

Appellant.

In this case, when the defence was called, the Appellant opted to make a

statement from the dock. Most of the facts submitted in the Appellant’s

written submission were not led in evidence at the trial. The prosecution, by

marking necessary documents had led plausible evidence against the

Appellant, which had not been challenged by the defence. Hence, this ground

too lacks merit.

In this case, the prosecution had called all necessary witnesses to prove the

charge. In a case of this nature, when the prosecution establishes that the

impugned investment could not have been made from the known income of

the Appellant, the burden shifts to the Appellant to prove the contrary.

In Liyanage Nishantha Perera v The Attorney General

CA/HCC/222/2011 decided on 25.08.2020 Justice Wengappuli held that:

“This Court already noted the evidence presented by the prosecution in

relation to the circumstances under which the officers have taken charge

of the large amount of bank notes from the possession of the Appellant.

The trial Court, although acquitted the Appellant by its judgment, had

nonetheless disbelieved the explanation offered by him as to the presence

of the large amount of bank notes. The contention that the High Court, in

its judgment had observed that the said amount of money was not earned

by the Appellant by "reasonable business activity" which is not the

applicable criterion as envisage by Section 425, cannot be accepted since

the High Court, in its impugned order and in rejecting his application

clearly concluded that the Appellant had earned the said amount of money

through criminal activity. Clearly the High Court had applied the correct

legal criterion in making the impugned order.”

As discussed under the grounds of appeal advanced by the Appellant, the

prosecution had adduced strong and incriminating evidence against the

CA/HCC/260-261/24

11 | P a g e

Appellant. The learned High Court Judge had accurately analyzed all the

evidence presented by both parties to arrive at the correct finding that the

Appellant was guilty of the charge levelled against him. Therefore, I dismiss

the Appeal and affirm the conviction and sentence imposed on the Appellant

on 21.03.2024 by the learned High Court Judge of Colombo. Considering all

the circumstances, the sentence is operative from the date of conviction.

The appeal is dismissed.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Colombo along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL