1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. PHC No. 43/06

H.C. Panadura 78/2004{Rev}

M.C.Panadura No.34667

The Officer in Charge

Police Station, Panadura

Complainant

Vs

1. W. Somapala

2. P.D. Perera

3. U. M. Wilbert

Party of the 1st Part.

W.Wickremasinghe

Party of the 2nd Part

1. W.A. Wimaladasa 2. W. Sumanawathie 3. W.M. Gunawathie

Intervenient Parties of the Party of the 1st Part

1. L.I. De Silva 2. A. Kularatne 3. H.S.S.Dewa Alwis 4. W.A. Jayasinghe

S. W.A. Kusumawathie 6. W.A. Sumithra

Intervenient Parties of the Party of the 2nd Part

1. G.D Perera 2. U.M. Wilbert 3. M.M.Wimaladasa

,!I

!

~I

f!r

~.l,

II

fi

!II

2

4. M.M.Gnawathie

2nd & 3rd Parties and 1st and 3rd

Intervenient Parties of theParty of the 1st Part Petitioners

Vs 1. W.Somapala

First (named) Party of the 1st

part Resondent 2. W.A. W. Perera Party of the 2nd Part Respondent

3. 1.I.De Alwis and 8 others

Intervenient Parties of the party of the 1st Part Respondent

AND NOW

W. Somapala of 41/1 Thuduwamulla Road, Mahaambalangoda

First (named) Party of the 1st Part

Respondent Appellant

Vs

1. G.D. Perera & 3 others 2nd & 3rd parties and 1st & 3rd

Intervenient parties of the Party of the 1st Part Petitioners Respondents

1. W. Sumanawathie Mallika

Intervenient Party of the 1st Part Respondent-Respondent I

i

3

BEFORE

COUNSEL:

ARGUED ON:

DECIDED ON:

Gaffoor J.,

Deepali Wijesundera J.,

M. M. A Gaffoor J.,

2. W. A. W. Perera

Party of the 2nd Part-Respondent Respondent

L.I.De Alwis and 5 others

Intervenient parties of the party of the 2nd Part respondent-Respondents

E.M.D.Upali with K.B.K. Umadevi for the 1st Part Respondent Appellant

Pubudu de Silva with S.H.U. Amarawansha for the 2nd & 3rd

Parties and 1st & 3rd Intervenient Petitioners of the Party of the 1st Party Petitioner Respondents

02.10.2015

11.03.2016

This is an appeal from the Judgment of the learned High court Judge of

Panadura dated 09.03.2006 arising from a Revision application filed in the High

Court of Panadura from the rectifications effected by the learned Magistrate to

his original order made under section 68(3) of the Primary Court Procedure Act.

4

The background facts relating to the instant appeal repeated from the appeal

brief is as follows:

The appellant lodged a complaint to the Panadura Police station alleging

that certain Wickramsinghe Perera removed and/or broken his concrete fence

which was erected on his land. Having entertained his complaint the police

recorded the statement of relevant persons by launching an inquiry on this

matter and initiated proceedings under Section 66{l)(a) of the Primary Courts

Procedure Act informing the court that there was a dispute affecting the land in

dispute which was likely to lead to a breach of peace between the parties.

The learned Magistrate ordered notice to be affixed on the disputed land

and called for an observation report as to the said land from the Panadura

Police on 29.10.2003, the 1st to 3rd named Intervenient Parties of the Party of

the first Part and the 1st and 3rd named Intervenient Parties to the Party of the

2nd Part and on 25.11.2003, the 4th to 6th named Intervenient Parties of the Party

of the second Part Intervened in the said case.

The parties availed filing affidavits, counter affidavits, submissions and

accordingly the learned Magistrate fixed the case for order and the same was

delivered on 08.09.2004 holding the real dispute in this case ensued between

5

Welhenage Somapala and Wickremasinghe Perera (who were the appellant and

the Party of the 2nd Part-Respondent-Respondent abovenamed respectively)

and therefore directing the Party of the first Part be restored to possession and

also prohibiting all disturbances to such possession.

An ambiguity seriously fel~ by the appellant in the said order in relation to

the terms "Party of the first Part" and "Parties of the first Part as used in some

places of the said order, the appellant who was affected by the said ambiguity

made an application by way of motion dated 14.10.2004 seeking to ascertain

the real meaning intended by the learned Magistrate in the said order. The

learned Magistrate thereupon issued notice on all parties returnable on

02.11.2004 for consideration of the said application in the presence of all

parties.

On 02.11.2004 the learned Magistrate took up the matter before all

parties who were present in court and having found the use of the term

I"Parties of the first Part" for "Party of the first Part" in some places of the said

II

order was per in curiam, forthwith rectified the term "Parties of the first Part"

to read as "Party of the first Part" and explained it to all parties in open Court.

6

Being aggrieved by the said rectification effected by the learned

Magistrate on 02.11.2004 to his original order dated 08.09.2004, the 2nd and 3rd

Parties and 1st and 3rd Intervenient Parties of the Party of the 1st Part -

Petitioners-Respondents made an application to the High Court of Panadura to

have restored the original order made by the learned Magistrate dated

08.09.2004 to it former state as it was before effecting the said rectifications.

After service of the notice, the parties appeared in the High Court of

Panadura filed their objections, counter affidavits and their written submissions

respectively. Thereafter the learned High Court Judge of Panadura delivered her

Judgment on 09.03.2006 holding that the rectifications effected by the learned

Magistrate to the original order were contrary to law; and directing that the

said rectifications be removed from the said original Order and further directing

the said Order to be effective in the same manner as it before such

rectifications.

Being aggrieved by the said Judgment of the learned High Court Judge of

Panadura the Appellant has appealed to this court notwithstanding the factual

situation obtaining in the original case the parties in the instant appeal have

conceded that the core issue is the rectifications.

7

It would appear that the original order of the learned was not frustrated

by the impugned rectification by merely inserting the correct parties. It is also

admitted by the parties in the appeal that before the rectifications the learned

Magistrate duly issued notice on all parties returnable on 02.11.2004 for the

consideration of application for the said rectifications and thereafter the said

rectifications were effected in the presence of all parties of the case. It is also

elicited fact that all other persons of the first Part had nothing to do with real

dispute between Welhenage Somapala and Wickremasinghe Perera.

The appellant averred in his written submissions that the rectifications

effected by the learned Magistrate is a correction of typographical error

whereas the respondent submitted that the rectifications are defects left by an

over sight. However, it was submitted that there was a correction which was

done by the learned Magistrate in his original case.

It is settled law that every court of justice in the course of its

administration of justice has a bounden duty to correct its own order in the

exercise of ex mere moto in case of procedural unfairness resulted in serious

injustice or prejudice caused to the appellant by the court.

8

The learned Magistrate would discharge his functions in terms of justice

and guiding principles of law and thereby his duty inferred from section 114 of

the Evidence Ordinance and also in the case of Silinona vs Oayalal Silva {i} the

court applied the maxim that an act of a court cannot prejudice a party {Actus

curiae neminem gravabitj. It is also assumed by this court that the learned

Magistrate had acted rectifying his original order in the same footing. In the

case of Billmoria vs Minister of land & land development {2} court is

empowered to correct the errors committed by inadvertence, forgetfulness or

oversight which is brought to notice of the court.

In the case of Gunasena vs Bandaratilake {3} where Wijetunga J, held that

{(The authorities ........... clearly indicate that a court has inherent power to repair

an injury caused to party by its own mistake. Once it is recognized that a court

would not allow a party to suffer by reason of its own mistake, I must follow

that corrective action should be taken as expeditiously as possible within the

framework of the law to remedy the injury caused thereby. The modalities are

best left to such court and would depend on the nature of the error."

The Judgment of All Ceylon Commercial & Industrial Workers Union vs

Ceylon Petroleum Corporation and another {4} the Supreme Court held that

9

court has inherent powers to correct its errors which are demonstrably and

manifestly wrong and where it is necessary in the interest of justice. In the other

case Esabella Perera Hamine vs Emalia Perera Hamine (5) the court held that

lithe courts are often faced with situations where they are obliged to act in

debite justitiae to do that real and substantial justice for the administration of

which alone the courts exist. A Judge will not fold his hands and allow rank

injustice to be done just because no rule of procedure is available ....... "

The court also perused two cases namely Abeysekera vs Haramanis et el

(6) and Sootihamy vs Charles et el (7) cited by the counsel for the Defendants in

the written submissions will not apply to the facts of the instant appeal

inasmuch as the situations arose in those cases and the present appeal are

entirely different from each other.

The reasons set out by the learned High Court Judge in his Judgment to

set aside the rectifications effected by the learned Magistrate appears to be

neither supportive nor sustainable to enable the revisionary jurisdiction

exercised by the High Court Judge.

For the reasons stated the court considers no error of law in the order for

the rectifications effected by the learned Magistrate on 2.11.2014. As such the

( j ,

10

learned High Court Judge has not properly considered this matter. In these

circumstances I hold that the learned High Court Judge was in error when he

decided to set aside the order of the rectifications effected by the learned

Magistrate to his original order.

For the above reasons, w'e set aside the judgment of the learned High

Court Judge dated 09.03.2006 and affirm the order of the learned Magistrate

dated 02.11.2004.

Appeal is allowed without costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Wijesundera J.,

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL