IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

W.A.D. Siriwardana,

No.466/5/7/7,

Sea Street,

Colpetty,

Colombo 03.

Petitioner

CASE NO: CA/WRIT/251/2017

Vs.

1. Gayantha Karunathilake,

Minister of Lands,

Mihikatha Madura,

Land Secretariat,

No.1200/6, Rajamalwatta Road,

Sri Jayawardhenapura Kotte.

2. Dr. W.H. Karunaarathna,

Secretary to the Ministry of

Lands,

Mihikatha Madura,

Land Secretariat,

No.1200/6, Rajamalwatta Road,

Sri Jayawardhenapura Kotte.

2

3. Mahinda Amaraweera,

Minister of Irrigation and

Agriculture,

Ministry of Irrigation and

Agriculture,

No.80/5,

Govijana Mandiraya,

Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

4. B. Wijayarathna,

Secretary to the Ministry of

Irrigation and Agriculture,

Ministry of Irrigation and

Agriculture,

No.80/5,

Govijana Mandiraya,

Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

5. Divisional Secretary,

Divisional Secretariat Kaduwela,

Malabe.

6. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Hulfstdorp,

Colombo 12.

Respondents

3

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

Counsel: Reshaal Seresinhe with Lasodha Siriwardhane

for the Petitioner.

Suranga Wimalasena, S.S.C., for the

Respondents.

Argued on: 25.06.2020

Decided on: 24.07.2020

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

There is no dispute the Petitioners land was acquired under the

provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, but compensation was

not paid to him.

As seen from the Gazette marked P6, a vesting order had been

made by the 1st Respondent Minister of Lands in 1979. For the

purpose of acquisition, Preliminary Plan No.5415 marked R6

was prepared. According to paragraphs 17 and 18 of the

statement of objections of the Respondents, the Petitioners land

is identifiable in the said Preliminary Plan:

17. However upon the Petitioners continued requests to be

paid compensation for land acquired under the P.Plan

5451, Plan no 1552 of the Petitioner was superimposed

upon the P.Plan 5451 and Plan CO/KDW/2005/470 dated

10.05.2006 has been prepared, which is marked X2 and is

pleaded as part and parcel hereof.

4

18. Upon the said plan CO/KDW/2005/470, it was

apparent that the land of the Petitioner identified in Plan

1552 was within the land identified in P.Plan 5451.

The Respondents admit in paragraph 14(h) of the statement of

objections:

The Petitioner has neither been called for inquiry (into

payment of compensation) under section 9 of the Act nor

paid compensation subsequent to an inquiry under section

10(1) of the Act.

As seen from P12 and P13 issued in 2010, the 1st Respondent

Minister admits the following:

(a) the Petitioners land, acquired several years ago, has

not been used for any public purpose;

(b) no improvements have been effected to the land;

(c) no compensation has been paid to the Petitioner;

(d) the Petitioner has consented to take possession of the

land;

(e) a divesting order can be made.

For clarity, let me quote the relevant portions of the said two

letters.

In P12 the Minister inter alia states:

5415 *+- 0 1 1 6 2

78 02 - 32.5 :> ?@ B C D

5

EF- IJB L >M N O

IJPQ D ST U V : X. @

CI ZE - S \M?] Z^B ?@6 6

B a @, c :S a

T@ O IJP B C d e

: J> B C 1 >

Cg6 ah.

P] i 6 >M -

?@ a B C 1 Z^ djd

e k> D 6 2 78 2 - 32.5 Z> B C

1 Z^ *l Q Pl m6 J.

In P13 the Minister inter alia states:

P] gBp B IJ EF-

6 Ejq a e k> 6 >M

a LQ B 1 p S >M q Ej ?1

r. 1 Z^ u- v1Q @ w a

T EF- x ?1 >M yC q ?1

z :O{ CB >J.

After the said acquisition under the Land Acquisition Act by the

Minister of Lands in 1979 (on behalf of the Urban Development

Authority), the same land was again acquired in 1997 by the

Minister of Lands, as seen from the Gazette marked R2(2). Why

there was a second acquisition remains a mystery; learned

Senior State Counsel appearing for the Respondents is unable to

explain the reason for it.

6

In the letter marked X, tendered with the counter affidavit of the

Petitioner, the 5th Respondent Divisional Secretary of Malabe

inter alia admits:

(a) the Petitioners land is included in Preliminary Plan

No.5415;

(b) the Petitioner has not been paid compensation;

(c) the Petitioners request (for divestiture or payment of

compensation) is reasonable;

(d) alternatively, the Petitioner can be given another

portion of land.

Let me quote paragraphs 7 and 8 of the said letter for better

understanding.

07. i EF- Q B 6 .5415

0 *+ 1 1@ LQ Cg B>> ?1 Z^

F> eB ?1 i P r.

y B @ > r @ >M

IJB ^6 L MF@ a @, >M

> q> d L MF@ a @ i i j@

M0 r.

08. Q I 6 @

a @, >M a @ M0 k> LQ

Cg Z^ e X.@ B k >M

qB > a k> LQ B @ >

rp >M 6P i L IJ k ?1 >M

7

y xB 6 1 Z^ kC

S6 MF@ J.

The said letter sent by the 4th Respondent is dated 04.07.2018.

It is the same Officer who filed the corresponding affidavit dated

26.09.2018 to the statement of objections of the Respondents.

With regard to non-payment of compensation to the Petitioner,

the position of learned Senior State Counsel for the Respondents

is the Petitioner did not make his claim to the acquiring officer

within the time period allowed in the Act. The Respondents

state in paragraph 14(f)-(h) of the statement of objections the

Respondent issued Notice under section 7 of the Land Acquisition

Act and a total of 35 claimants had been called for inquiries

under section 10(1) of the Act, of whom 27 were paid

compensation.

It is the position of the Petitioner that he was totally unaware of

such an inquiry for payment of compensation and he was not

served with notice. Learned Counsel for the Petitioner draws the

attention of the Court to section 17 of the Act to formulate the

argument that the acquiring officer shall give written notice to

persons entitled to compensation. Clearly, section 17 has no

application in this context, as the written notice referred to

therein relates to the award of compensation made after the

inquiry under section 9 of the Act.

However, in my view, in the facts and circumstances of this

case, the contention of the Petitioner that he was unaware of the

inquiry is acceptable. Let me explain.

8

After the initial procedure for acquisition has been followed as

laid out by the Act, the acquiring officer shall, in terms of section

7, cause notice to be published in the following manner:

(a) in the Gazette in the Sinhala, Tamil and English

languages, and

(b) if the value of the land exceeds five hundred rupees, in

a Sinhala newspaper, Tamil newspaper and an English

newspaper, and

(c) cause the notice in those languages to be exhibited in

some conspicuous place on or near the land.

In the notice under section 7, the acquiring officer shall inter alia

state/direct:

(a) claims for compensation for the acquisition of the land

may be made to the acquiring officer,

(b) the date, time and place for persons interested in the

land to appear before the acquiring officer for an

inquiry into claims for compensation, and

(c) particulars of such claims to be made at least seven

days prior to the date scheduled for the inquiry.

The Respondents have tendered only the document marked

R7(1) to prove compliance with section 7 of the Act. The said

document reads as follows:

9

Q : @ 19/15

1981 B- 30 T M,

Ma -c p .

1964 28 B @eB (S) a> S FM

B @eB @ 7 >a @ >qX.

I > Cc k B e

@1 r. \ k - 196N T M

c Uc (III) >.

C

:..T.: z

: @yC

*I: @yC d... 1

B : M>

0 : .5415

0 : 1-4

..-

M6c @eB

TF M6 B TF.

The document R7(1) reproduced above is not proof of publishing

and exhibiting notice in the Gazette, newspapers and on the

land. The Respondents state in paragraph 14(f) of the statement

of objections the Respondent issued Notice under section 7 of the

Land Acquisition Act a copy of which is annexed as R7(1) and is

pleaded as part and parcel hereof. It is not clear what the

10

Respondents mean by issued notice under section 7 of the Act.

They do not say notice was published and exhibited in the

Gazette, newspapers and on the land.

In the facts and circumstances of this case, it is my considered

view notice to persons interested under section 7 of the Act has

not been properly given by the acquiring officer in terms of the

express provisions of the Act.

De Smith recognises the imperative nature of certain procedural

requirements, stating:

Some classes of procedural requirements are so important

that they will nearly always be held to be mandatory. For

example, an authority which fails to comply with a

statutory duty to give prior notice or hold a hearing or make

due inquiry or consider objections in the course of exercising

discretionary powers affecting individual rights will seldom

find the courts casting an indulgent eye upon his omissions.

Non-compliance or inadequate compliance with an express

duty to give particulars of rights of appeal may render an

administrative determination invalid. A provision requiring

consultation with named bodies before a statutory power is

exercised is also likely to be construed as mandatory.1

De Smith goes on to state:

Thus, where powers are conferred to issue orders or

certificates that affect civil liberties or rights to

compensation, the courts have insisted that the decision-

1 De Smiths Judicial Review (8th Edition), pp.275-276.

11

maker must closely observe all material requirements as to

form.2

However, De Smith immediately thereafter acknowledges,

whereas formalities pertaining to inter alia notices were

previously construed literally and rigorously, the Court is at

present more likely to pardon omissions if no substantial

prejudice is caused to the affected party.

Given the facts and circumstances of this case, I am of the view

substantial prejudice has been caused to the Petitioner due to

non-adherence to the provisions of publishing notice under

section 7.

As I have already stated, the acquiring officer refuses to pay

compensation because the Petitioner did not come forward at

the right time. This is unacceptable in view of the

abovementioned facts.

However, the Petitioner in the prayer to the petition does not

seek compensation.

As seen from X1 tendered by the Respondents with the

statement of objections, the Petitioner has been agitating for

relief with the proper authorities since at least 1983. The

documents marked P9, P10, P14, P15, P16, P17, P21, X, clearly

establish this position. The Petitioner has not been sleeping

over his rights.

2 De Smiths Judicial Review (8th Edition), p.276.

12

By filing this application, the Petitioner seeks to compel the 1st

Respondent Minister by a writ of mandamus to make a divesting

order in his favour under section 39 of the Act.

In terms of section 39A(2) of the Act, the Minister can make a

divesting order upon satisfaction of four criteria.

(a) no compensation has been paid under this Act to any

person or persons interested in the land in relation to

which the said divesting Order is to be made;

(b) the said land has not been used for a public purpose

after possession of such land has been taken by the

State under the provisions of paragraph (a) of section 40;

(c) no improvements to the said land have been effected

after the Order for possession under paragraph (a) of

section 40 had been made; and

(d) the person or persons interested in the said land have

consented in writing to take possession of such land

immediately after the divesting Order is published in the

Gazette.

If the said four criteria are satisfied, the Court can by

mandamus compel the Minister to make a divesting order. Vide

J.K. Anura Banda Piyarathna v. Minister of Lands and Land

Development;3 E.M.P. Erandathi Ratnayaka v. Minister of Lands

3 CA/WRIT/344/2012, CA Minutes of 20.02.2020.

13

and Land Development;4 and N.W. Leelawathi v. Minister of

Lands and Land Development.5

In light of the contents of the Ministers letters marked P12 and

P13 quoted above, I am of the view the Petitioner has satisfied

the four criteria stipulated in 39A(2) of the Act. The Petitioner

has tendered photographs marked P18-P20, albeit undated,

whereby it appears the said land has been left untended and

unutilised. The Respondents do not claim either that the said

land has been utilised or improved thus far.

At the argument, it was submitted condition (a) under section

39A(2) has not been satisfied because, as seen from R8(1),

compensation was paid to some persons interested in the land.

It was stressed, if compensation has been paid to any person or

persons interested in the land, as specified in condition (a), a

divesting order in terms of section 39A(2) cannot be made. I

regret my inability to agree with this contention without

qualifications.

In the first place, the said argument is against the clear position

of the Minister in P12 and P13, whereby he acknowledges that

the Petitioner has satisfied all four criteria for divestiture.

Secondly, any person in section 39A(2)(a) cannot be given an

unduly narrow interpretation to the detriment of citizens whose

lands have been unreasonably acquired by the State.

4 CA/WRIT/302/2014, CA Minutes of 20.02.2020.

5 CA/WRIT/306/2014, CA Minutes of 20.02.2020.

14

Why I say unreasonably above is because the land in this case

was acquired under proviso (a) to section 38 of the Land

Acquisition Act in the year 1979 on the ground of urgency but

has been left undeveloped for more than 40 years. The State or

State functionaries cannot use the Land Acquisition Act to

irresponsibly take over private lands in the guise of urgency and

then let the land stand idle for several decades. That is a

betrayal of the public trust doctrine (vide The Colombo Buddhist

Theosophical Society v. The Secretary, Ministry of Education)6.

As held by this Court in K.P.S.D. De Silva v. L.H.S.C. Silva,

Commander of the Sri Lanka Army,7 when a statute can be

interpreted in favour of either the subject or the State, the

tendency is to interpret it in favour of the former, for it is the

fundamental obligation of the State to protect the interests of

citizens, for the benefit of whom alone the latter exists. There is

a presumption the legislature does not intend what is

unreasonable and unjustifiable.

If a large extent of land is acquired for a public purpose, and, for

instance, only half of it is used for the said purpose, a divesting

order for the remaining portion cannot be refused relying on

section 39A(2)(a) on the basis that compensation was paid to the

persons whose portions were used for the public purpose. Such

an interpretation leads to an absurdity. It is the duty of the

Court to give purposive interpretation to the section. If the

portion of land sought to be divested can be separated from the

rest of the land and no compensation has been paid to any

6 CA/WRIT/338/2009, CA Minutes of 28.05.2020.

7 CA/WRIT/380/2016, CA Minutes of 19.05.2020.

15

person in respect of the said portion, in my view, a divesting

order shall be made, provided the claimant satisfies the other

three requirements stipulated in section 39A(2) of the Act.

Bindra8 recognises the importance of interpreting legislation in a

manner that avoids injustice but maintains the purpose of the

Act:

Where there are two constructions, the one of which will do

great and unnecessary injustice, and the other of which will

avoid that injustice, and will keep exactly within the

purpose for which the statute was passed, it is the bounden

duty of the court to adopt the second and not to adopt the

first of those constructionsIt is a legitimate method of

construction to give an Act a liberal meaning if that can be

done reasonably. Too literal a construction should not be

followed when it leads to an absurdity if a somewhat more

liberal construction would lead to an effective application of

the Act.

The interpretation of section 39A(2)(a) given above is in

consonance with the Judgments of the superior Courts handed

down under the Land Acquisition Act. For instance, in the

Supreme Court case of De Silva v. Atukorale,9 nearly 20 acres of

land had been acquired under the Land Acquisition Act for the

Bibile Town Development Project and compensation was paid for

some portions of the land. Several years later, a decision was

taken to construct a shopping complex on part of the acquired

8 Bindras Interpretation of Statutes, 12th Edition, p.347. 9 [1993] 1 Sri LR 283.

16

land. The application of the Petitioner to issue a writ of

mandamus compelling the Minister to divest the land, on the

ground that the whole process was politically motivated, was

dismissed by the Court of Appeal. On appeal, the Supreme

Court did issue mandamus to divest the portion of land not

required to construct the shopping complex.

A similar conclusion was reached by this Court in the related

cases of J.K. Anura Banda Piyarathna v. Minister of Lands and

Land Development (supra), E.M.P. Erandathi Ratnayaka v.

Minister of Lands and Land Development (supra), and N.W.

Leelawathi v. Minister of Lands and Land Development (supra).

For the aforesaid reasons, I direct the 1st Respondent by way of a

writ of mandamus to make a divesting order in favour of the

Petitioner in respect of the portions of the Petitioners land not

used for any public purpose up to now. The said portions of the

land are admittedly identifiable by Plan No. CO/KDW/2005/470

dated 10.05.2006.

During the course of the argument, learned Counsel for the

Petitioner expressed his willingness to accept compensation in

lieu of divestiture. The above order shall not stand as an

obstacle if both parties come to a compromise in this regard.

The reliefs prayed for in paragraphs (c) and (d) are granted.

The application of the Petitioner is allowed with costs.

17

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal