IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRAIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Court of Appeal Case No. CA 228/2012 Writ

Pussallawa Plantetion Limited, 168,Entomb Road, Peliyagoda. Petitioner

Vs.

1. Minister of Plantation industries,

55175, Vaxaull Street, Colombo 2.

2. Land Reform Commission, C8, Gregory Road, Colombo 7.

3. Janatha Estate Development Board,

55175, Vaxaull Street, Colombo 2.

4. The Hon Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

1

5. Samastha Lanka Medaperadiga Sewa Samithiya

Before

Counsel

403, Waragoda Road, Kelaniya.

Respondents

: L.T.B. Dehideniya 1.

:Thishya Weeragoda with Mahela Liyanage for the Petitioner.

S.S. Sahabandu pc. With S. Rajapakse for the 2nd Respondent

Malinda Gunathilake DSG for the 1St, 3rd ,and 4th Respondents.

5th Respondent absent and unrepresented.

Argued on : 30.09.2015

Decided on : 14.06.2016

t f

\, ,

2

L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

The Petitioner presented this application seeking a mandate in the

nature of writ of certiorari to quash an order of the 1 st Respondent Minister

dated 26-06.2005 divesting a part of the land, a writ of prohibition against

the 1 st and 2nd Respondents prohibiting from taking any step towards re-

vesting the land, a writ of mandamus compelling the 3 rd Respondent to

perform his legal obligation, a writ of prohibition against the 3rd Respondent

prohibiting the termination of the lease agreement, and seeking interim

orders. The Petitioner is a company incorporated under sec 15 (1) of the

Companies Act No. 17 of 1982 read together with section 2(2) of the

Conversion of Public Corporations or Government Owned Business

Undertakings in to Public Companies Act No.23 of 1987.

The land Called Penrith Estate was vested in the 2nd Respondent

Land Reform Commission under the Land Reform Law No.1 of 1972. The

Minister in charge of the subject of agriculture published an order in the

Gazette Extraordinary No. 183/10 dated 12.03.1982 under section 42H read

together with section 27 A (1) of the Land Reform Law vesting several the

lands, including the Penrith Estate, in the 3rd Respondent JEDB (marked

A2). The Minister has not imposed any condition on consideration.

Thereafter the Petitioner entered in to a 99 year lease agreement with the 3rd

Respondent. The 1 st Respondent, thereafter, by order published in the

Gazette No. 943/20 dated 03.10.1996 re-vested 43 acres in the 2nd

Respondent (marked A4). The Petitioner has not objected to this re-vesting.

The reason given is that it was done for a "greater public good". The 1 st

Respondent thereafter published another order under section 27 A (4) of the

Land Reform Law in the Gazette Extraordinary No. 1406/5 dated 26.06

2005 (marked A8) re-vesting a portion of land in extent 10.7625 Hectares.

!,k

Ii t

t

~

3

The Petitioner challenge the order of the 1 st Respondent marked A 8 on the

basis that the 1 st Respondent has no authority to re-vest the land under

section 27 A (4) as there is no any condition on consideration was imposed

in the vesting order published under section 27 A (1) marked A2.

By virtue of the order published in the gazette marked A2, the land in

question was vested in 3rd Respondent and the Petitioner is the lessee of the

3rd Respondent. The Petitioner's entitlement is only the leasehold rights of

the land. Even after re-vesting a small portion of the land such as 10.7625

Hectares, the balance major portion is still vested in the 3rd Respondent and

the Petitioner is entitle to enjoy the leasehold rights of the said remaining

portion of the land. Under these circumstances can the Petitioner have and

maintain this action? The Petitioner has entered in to a lease agreement with

the 3rd Respondent. If the Petitioner is ousted from any part of the land, its

being a breach of contract, he may have a remedy against the 3 rd Respondent

in private law. The lease agreement has provided a procedure for the dispute

settlement. The Petitioner has no any statutory right to possess the land and

therefore he cannot seek judicial review.

The case of Bogawantalawa Plantations Ltd. V Minister of Public

Administration and Plantations Affairs and others [2004] 2 Sri L R 329 is a

case of similar nature. In that case the Minister has made an order re-vesting

the entire land and the Petitioner who was in possession on a memorandum

entered into with the JEDB, instituted action. His Lordship Saleem Maesoof

J observed "This Court finds that the petitioner, who is admittedly in

possession of the lands in question and has expended enormous sums of

money for the development of the estates, is a person "affected by the Order

P7, and is therefore entitled to seek redress from this Court by way of

prerogative relief" In the case before me the Petitioner aver in paragraph

27 that he effected considerable improvements to the Penrith Estate and

4

invested a considerable amount of money in development work. In

paragraph 34 the Petitioner aver that he spend more than Rs. 300 million in

developing and improving the Salawa Estate. The re-vested portion by the

impugned gazette is only 10.7625 Hectares. There is no material to

substantiate the truth of the averment that he has spent such an amount of

money. Even if it is conceded that such a large amount of money was spent,

there is no any evidence to show the developments and improvements

effected by the Petitioner to the portion of land that was re-vested and the

amount of money that has been spend on that portion. The full amount of Rs

300 million was not spend on the 10.7625 Hectares that has been re-vested

by the Minister. Therefore, the basis that His Lordship Saleem Marsoof J.

considered in the case of Bogawanthalawa Plantetion Ltd. (supra) to hold

that the Petitioner is a effected party, cannot be applied to this case. The

Petitioner's remedy is in the private law, not by way of judicial review of an

administrative decision. The Petitioner has no locus standi.

It is not necessary to consider the merits of this case as the Petitioner

lacks the locus standi, but for the completeness of the judgment, I will

consider the merits. The section 27 A (4) of the Land Reform Law gives

authority to the Minister to re-vest the land by publishing an order in the

gazette. The section reads thus;

27 A. (4) Where any term or condition relating to consideration

for the vesting of any agricultural land or estate land or

portion thereof in any such State Corporation by an Order

under subsection (1) is not complied with, the Minister may by

Order published in the Gazette, revoke the Order under

subsection (1) relating to that land and thereupon that land

shall revert in the Commission.

5

It has been held in the case of Bogawanthalawa Plantetion Limited

(supra) that the Minister can revoke the order made under sub section (1)

only if the condition relating to consideration is not complied with. It is held

that;

In the absence of any evidence of any agreement or arrangement

between the Land Reform Commission and the 6th respondent

Janatha Estate Development Board relating to consideration for the

initial vesting of title in the Board, this Court is unable to hold that

there has been any non-compliance which could justify the making of

an order to revest the estates in question in the Commission. In the

circumstances, this Court holds that an important pre-condition for

the Minister to make an order ofrevesting under section 27 (A) (4) of

the Land Reform Law does not exist, and the order P7 is clearly ultra

vires.

His Lordship Sriskandarajah J took a deferent view in the case of

Namunukula Plantetion Ltd and another v. Minister of Lands and others CA

Writ Application 38/2003 CA Minutes dated 2.05.2008. His Lordship held

that "the Minister's power under section 27 A (4) is discretionary." His

Lordship further held that "On the other hand if certain portions of such

estates are needed for other purposes which are considered as more useful

and important purpose the Minister could use his discretion and revoke only

that portion of estate needed for that purpose. Such a decision to revoke the

vesting of a portion of a land in the estate which was vested is not ultra

vires to the provisions of section 27 A (4). "

In the present case the Petitioner also acted in the same manner. The

Minister, before the impugned re-vesting order was made, has made an

order re-vesting another portion of 43 acres of the same land by the gazette

marked A4. The Petitioner did not object to this re-vesting order because the

I ! J

6

Petitioner considered that it was for a "greater public good". (Paragraph 18,

19 and 20 of the petition) This is the view taken by His Lordship

Sriskandarajah J. in the case cited above. I incline to agree with His

Lordship Sriskandarajah J. on the view that the Minister could use his

discretion and revoke a portion of the land vested, if it is needed for other

purpose of public importance. Alienation under section 22 (1) (t) is also of

public importance because the law provided for such alienation.

Under these circumstances, I dismiss this application. No costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal