1 IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRAIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

In the matter of an appeal in terms of Article 138

read together with Article 154 P of the Constitution

of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Court of Appeal case no. CA/PHC/168/97

H.C. Chilaw case no. H.C.A/50/97

M.C. Puttalam case no. 9729/96/P

1. Hameedu Abdul Muhuthar,

Principal, Muslim Vidyalaya,

Kadayamotte, Madurankuliya.

2. Seinul Abdeen Abddul Hassan,

Marikkar Chanal, Madurankuliya.

3. Sahul Hameed Mohamed Rafick,

Kadiyamottal, Madurankuliya.

Party of the First Part

Vs.

1. Mohomad Haniffa Subayar,

Marikkr Chanal, Madurankuliya.

2. Mohamed Haniffa Abdul Wahid,

Kadaiamottai, Madurankuliya.

Party of the Second Part

AND NOW

I f If

~ tJ

I

f,

~ !

~ f I . t Ii f f , l

Before

Counsel

1. Mohomad Haniffa Subayar,

Marikkr Chanal, Madurankuliya.

2. Mohamed Haniffa Abdul Wahid,

Kadaiamottai, Madurankuliya.

Party of the Second Part Petitioner

Appellants

Vs

1. Hameedu Abdul Muhuthar,

Principal, Muslim Vidyalaya,

Kadayamotte, Madurankuliya.

2. Seinul Abdeen Abddul Hassan,

Marikkar Chanal, Madurankuliya.

3. Sahul Hameed Mohamed Rafick,

Kadiyamottal, Madurankuliya.

Party of the First Part Respondent

Respondents

: H.C.J.Madawala J.

: L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

: N .R.M.Dal uwatta PC for the Party of the Second Part

Petitioner Appellants

: H.G.Hussain for the Party of the First Part Respondent

Respondents

Argued on : 03.11.2016

Decided on : 20.02.2017

L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

This is an appeal from the High Court of Chilaw.

The First Respondent of the First Party Respondent Respondents

(the Respondents) is the Principal of the Muslim Vidyalaya of

Kadayamotte, Madurankuliya and the 2nd and 3rd Respondents of the First

Party Respondent Respondents are members of the school development

society. The Respondents made a complaint to the police stating that the

Second Party Respondent Petitioners Appellants (the Appellants) have

started to construct a barbed wire fence across the school play ground and

the school development society intervened and prevented the construction

of the fence. The Appellants made a statement to the police in response to

the said complaint that they owned the land in dispute and they started the

construction of the fence on the strength of their ownership. The police

filed information in the Magistrate Court of Puttalam under section 66 of

the Primary Court Procedure Act. The learned Magistrate after

considering the affidavits and documents determined that the

Respondents were in possession within the two months prior to filing the

information in Court. Being dissatisfied, the Appellants moved in

revision in the High Court of Chilaw. The learned High Court Judge

affirmed the order of the learned Magistrate. This appeal is from the said

order of the High Court.

The Respondents stated that the land in dispute was donated to the

school by a former Minister Mr. Naina Marikkar and since then the land

was used by the students of the school as a play ground. The State has

spent money on several occasions to develop the school play ground and

all the time the play ground was in the possession of the school and the

students used it as a play ground. During the civil war prevailed in the

country, some of the displaced persons from Jaffna have temporarily

occupied a portion of the school play ground. The Appellants on or about

15.06.1995 tried to take over a part of the play ground forcibly. They

produced the letters issued by the authorities in relation moneys spend to

the development of the play ground in support. The Appellants contention

is that the son of Mr. Naina Marikkar has transferred the land in dispute

to the second party of the Appellant and another by a deed and the said

land is depicted in the plan No. 75 marked 2 Pa 2. Their stand is that they

possessed the land in dispute on the strength of the deed and they wanted

to fence out the land.

In a case of a land dispute threatening a breach of the peace in the

Primary Court under Primary Court Procedure Act section 66, the

ownership of the land is not material but the possession of the land within

two months prior to the filing of the information is the most relevant fact.

Ramalingam v. Thangarajah [1982] 2 Sri L R 693

That a Judge should in an inquiry under Section 66 confine himself

to the question of actual possession on the date of filing

information except in a case where a person who had been in

possess ion of land had been dispossessed within a period of two

months immediately preceding filing of information.

The Respondents clearly established that the land was m the

possession of the school. Time to time the play ground has been

developed by the authorities concern. It further strengthens the fact that

the play ground was in the possession of the school.

The Appellants are relying on a plan made by them to show the

possession. The southern boundary of the lot 2 depicted in the plan 2Pa 2

is the school play ground. All boundaries in the said plan are marked as

undefined. The boundary separating the play ground and the lot 2 in the

plan is marked by the surveyor by positioning stakes on the ground. This

fact establishes that there was no boundary there to separate the play

ground and the Appellants were trying to construct/create a new

boundary.

Under these circumstances I hold that the learned Magistrate and

the learned High Court Judge have come to the correct finding that the

Respondents were in possession of the land in dispute.

At this stage I like to point out another defect in the petition of

appeal. In the prayer to the petition of appeal dated 25th November 1997

the main relief prayed for is to "set aside the order of the learned High

Court Judge dated 13.1l.1997." There is no prayer to set aside the order

of the learned Magistrate or to grant relief as prayed for in the petition

filed in the High Court. Even if this Court set aside the order of the

learned High Court Judge, the order of the learned Magistrate will remain

in force. This Court cannot grant any relief which is not prayed for.

Therefore granting relief prayed for in this petition of appeal will not

serve any purpose.

Under these circumstances I see no reason to interfere with the

findings of the learned High Court Judge.

Accordingly I dismiss the appeal subject to cost fifed at Rs.

10,000/=

Judge of the Court of Appeal

H.C.J.Madawala J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal