i ! I

I I

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

CN157/2014

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for mandates in the

nature of Writ of Certiorari under and in terms of

Article 140 of the Constitution of Sri Lanka

Stassen Exports Private Limited,

No.833, Sirimavo Bandaranaike Mw,

P.O. 1970,

Colombo 14.

PETITIONER

Vs,

1. Mr. M.M.I.R.A.Jayathilaka, Assistant Commossioner of Labour, Colombo North, Office of the Assistant Commissioner of Labour of Colombo North, 4th Floor, Deparment of Labour, Narahenpita, Colombo as.

2. The Commissioner General of Labour, Labour Secretariat, Kirula Rd, Narahenpita, Colombo as.

3. Mr. W.J. Moses, 57/14A, 8th Lane, Jayaweera Mw, Ethul Kotte, Kotte.

4. Deputy Commissioner Labour, Legal Activities, Department of Labour, Colombo as.

RESPONDENTS

I l I \ 1

I 1 1

2

Before : Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J (PICA) &

H.C.J. Madawala J

Counsel :Upul Kumarapperuma for the petitioner

Priyantha Nawana DSG for the 1st ,2nd , 4th Respondents

S. Liyanage for the 3rd Respondent

Argued On: 18.06.2015, 14.07.2015

Ordered On: 11.09.2015

Order

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J (PICA)

Petitioner to this application Stassen Exports Private Limited has come before this court against an order

made by the 1st and / or 2nd Respondents, directing the petitioner to deposit sum of Rs.784 320. 00 as

gratuity payment due to one W.J.Moses (3rd Respondent) and penalty, under section 8(1) of the Payment

of Gratuity Act No.12 of 1983 (as amended by Act No. 41 of 1990 and 62 of 1992)

The Petitioner has prayed inter alia;

b. Grant and issue a mandate in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari, quashing the afore said

notification of the 1st Respondent dated 19.11.2012 in P-ll

c. Grant and issue a mandate in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari, quashing the certificate issued

by the 4th Respondent in terms of section 8(1) of the Payment of Gratuity Act No.12 of 1983 as

amended by Act No. 41 of 1990 and 62 of 1992 embodied in P-24

According to the Petitioner, the 3rd Respondent was appointed a wharf clerk on 01st May 1980 and was

promoted to the post of Junior Executive in April 1984. In April 1993 he was promoted to the post of

Senior Executive and thereafter promoted as Assistant Manager- wharf with effect from 1st July 2003.

3rd Respondent had reached his retiring age i.e 55 years in April 2009 and on his request the Petitioner

extended his services, after promoting him to the post of Manager-Import Logistics.

Petitioner had further submitted that, whist the 3rd Respondent was functioning as the Manager-Import

logistics, it was revealed upon an Investigation done by the Internal Audit that the 3rd Respondent is

f

J

3

responsible for defrauding a large sum of money to the Petitioner Company. Upon the said revelation,

the Petitioner had decided to hold a preliminary investigation against the 3rd Respondent.

At that stage the 3rd Respondent had tendered his resignation from the service with effect from the 3rd

April 2012 (P-3) but the Chairman of the Petitioner by letter dated 3rd April 2012 informed the 3rd

Respondent that his letter of resignation could not be accepted for the reason that he was essential for the

investigation that has been commenced against him. (P-4)

However the 3rd Respondent by letter dated 30th April (P-5) informed the Petitioner Company his

decision, not to continue with his services from 02nd May 2012 and by letter dated 26th June requested

the Chairman of the Petitioner Company to make arrangements to pay his gratuity money. (P-6)

According to the Petitioner, by P-7 Petitioner has refused the said request since the said investigation

has not been concluded.

However the 15t Respondent by document marked P-8 which was submitted to him along with P-9, a

copy of complaint, said to have made by the 3rd Respondent informed the petitioner to be present for an

inquiry which was scheduled to be held on 28th August 2012.

Petitioner participated the said inquiry on 28th August 2012 through his representative and informed the

15t respondent that a preliminary investigation is in progress with regard to the misconduct and

misappropriation of funds belonging to the petitioner company and requested the 15t Respondent to stay

the proceedings until the preliminary investigations are concluded. t

According to the petitioner, after conclusion of the preliminary investigation, on 19th September 2012 a

charge sheet was issued on the 3rd Respondent containing 13 charges and requested the 3rd Respondent

to show cause within 7 days to the said charge sheet.

However the 3rd Respondent did not take part at the said disciplinary inquiry and failed and lor neglect

to submit his show cause.

The said inquiry was re-scheduled for several days with notice to the 3rd Respondent and finally

informed the 3rd Respondent that the inquiry would be proceeded exparte by P-20 and the said inquiry

was concluded or 19th May 2014.

According to the findings of the said inquiry which was produced marks P-22, the inquirer has found the

3rd Respondent guilty of charges 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,9 and 13.

~Ir

4

The position taken up by the petitioner before this court was that, on 281h August 2012, the petitioner

took part at the inquiry held before the 1 sl Respondent on which day, he was permitted by the 1 sl

respondent to proceed with the domestic inquiry and inform the progress to the 1 sl Respondent, and

since then he did not receive any communication except P-ll which I will be dealing later. However the

petitioner received summons directing him to appear before the Chief Magistrate Colombo on 291h May

2014 in case No D2485/05 for the alleged offence of defaulting the payment of gratuity of Rs.784370.00

to the 3rd Respondent.

Based on the above facts the Petitioners argument before this court was twofold, firstly the lSI and lor

2nd and/or 41h Respondent failed to give an opportunity to the petitioner to explain his position and/ or to

place his case before the inquiry and secondly the 1 Sl and/or 2nd and/or 41h Respondent failed to give

reason for their findings as evinced in the documents produced marked P-ll and P-24.

1 s" 2nd and 41h Respondents as well as the 3rd Respondent had challenged the Petitioner version with

regard to the employment of the 3rd Respondent with the Petitioner Company.

In addition to the above, the IS" 2nd and 41h Respondents, challenged the Petitioners version with regard

to the Inquiry conducted by the 1 sl Respondent and submitted that the 3rd Respondent by letter dated

13/07/2012 complained the 2nd Respondent of none payment of EPF dues and gratuity by the petitioner.

On receipt of the said complaint the 1 Sl Respondent requested both parties to be present for an inquiry on

28.08.2012 at 1.30 pm (P-8, P-9)

On 28.08.2012 only the complainant (3rd Respondent) was present for the inquiry but the employer

(petitioner) was absent and unrepresented. The inquiry was re-fixed for 11/ 09/2012 at 10.00 am. (IR6)

On 11.09.2012 the employer (Petitioner) was represented by its legal officer at the inquiry. The said

legal officer who represented the Petitioner Company had informed the inquiry officer, that the

Management of the Petitioner Company had decided to launch an investigation against the applicant (3rd

Respondent) on allegations of cheating and therefore requested the 1 sl Respondent to suspend the

mqUIry.

However in response to the above request, the 3rd Respondent submitted before the inquiry that until his

resignation from the Petitioner Company, no such allegation was made and therefore requested the 151

Respondent to calculate his dues.

Considering the submissions made by both parties, the 1 sl Respondent had decided to adjourn the

proceedings for two weeks and the Petitioner was ordered (employer) to inform the progress of the

I

f

5

inquiry he referred to, against the 3rd Respondent (complainant) in writing on the next day. It was further

informed by the lSI respondent that if the petitioner failed to comply with the said directive, steps will be

taken to calculate and recover the dues to the 3rd Respondent. The said inquiry was then adjourned for

26.09.2012.

According to the proceedings before the lSI Respondent, which was produced marked 1R6, when the

inquiry was again taken up on 26.09.2012, the Legal Officer who represented the Petitioner Company

had informed the lSI Respondent that the management had already sent out a charge sheet against the 3rd

Respondent, and in view of the said disciplinary inquiry the Petitioner cannot make any gratuity

payment to the 3rd Respondent. At that stage the 3rd Respondent too had made submission objecting to

the above request and supporting his contention as to why lSI Respondent should act under the

provisions of the Payment of Gratuity Act No. 12 of 1983.

Based on the submission made before the inquiry officer, the decision of the lSI Respondent was

communicated to the petitioner by P-11.

However the petitioner's position before this court was that, after receIvmg P-ll the Petitioner

Company had protested to the decision of the lSI Respondent and the said protest was communicated to

the lSI Respondent by P-12.

However, interestingly, the petitioner has not received any communication thereafter from the lSI and/or

2nd and/or 41h respondent until the receipt of P-24.

The position taken up by the respondent before this court was that, after receiving P-12 the lSI

Respondent by letter dated 15.12.2012 summoned the Petitioner for an inquiry on 02.01.2013.(lR4-A)

The said letter too was sent to the same address as referred to in P-ll. Since the Petitioner did not turn

up for the said inquiry, another notice was sent on 02.01.2013 informing the Petitioner to be present for

an inquiry on 16.01.2013 (IR4-B), but the Petitioner did not turn up for the inquiry even on that day.

Since the petitioner did not turn up twice the lSI Respondent decided to enforce his decision dated

19.11.2012 through courts. (IRS)

Based on the material placed before this court and the submissions made, I see no merit in the 151

argument of the Petitioner, to the effect that the Respondents have not given the Petitioner an

opportunity to place his case before the 151 Respondent. After receiving P-12 an appeal from the

Petitioner the 151 Respondent on two occasions noticed the Petitioner for an inquiry. The said notices

were dispatched to the same address given in P-ll and P-24. If the Petitioner had received P-ll and

I

f

I

tI[

t!

I I 1

I

6

P-24 this court is reluctant to agree with the petitioner, that he did not receive any other document in

between. If the Petitioner has not made any attempt to make use of the opportunity given to him to

explain his position, it is not wrong for this court to conclude that there is no merit in the Petitioners'

first Argument.

The principles of natural justice do not as yet, include any general rule that reasons should be given for

decisions.

However the importance of giving reasons irrespective of the fact that there is no express or implied

obligation to do so had been clearly shown in many judicial decisions.

As Wade says "Nevertheless there is strong case to be made for the giving of reasons as an essential

element of administrative Justice. The need for it has been sharply exposed by the expanding law of

judicial review, now that so many decisions are liable to be quashed or appealed against on grounds of

improper purpose irrelevant considerations, and errors of law of various kinds. Unless the citizen can

discover the reasoning behind the decision, he may be unable to tell whether it is reviewable or not,

and so he may be deprived of the protection of the law". (H.W.R.Wade and C.F.Forsyth

Administrative law 10th Edition page 436).

The house of Lords too has considered the legal position as regards giving of reasons. In R V

Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex parte Doody (1994) 1 AC 531 the Court dealt with a

life sentence term of a prisoner. The Secretary of State had not given reasons for the sentence which

had been imposed. The Court held that although the law does not recognize a general duty to give

reasons for an administrative decision, such a duty can be implied in appropriate circumstances. The

prisoner could challenge the sentence only if it could be shown to be based on flawed reasoning.

The necessity to give reasons was also considered by our courts in a number of instances.

Happuarachchi and others vs. Commissions of Elections and others, Karunadasa vs. Unique Gem

Stones, Surangai Marapone vs. The Bank of Ceylon are few such decisions.

In the case of Kurunadasa vs. Unique Gem Stones (1997) (1) SLR 256, Mark Fernando (J) has

observed the need to give reason as follows.

"To say that Natural Justice entitles a party to a hearing does not mean merely that his evidence and

submission must be heard and recorded, it necessarily means that he is entitled to a reasoned

I

II

..

7

consideration of the case which he presents. And whether or not the parties are also entitled to be told

the reasons for the decision, if they are with held, once judicial review commenced .... "

In the case of Kurunadasa vs. Unique Gem Stones, Supreme Court further concluded that "But that

does not end the matter. The legal position was not clearly appreciated, and the parties do not seem to

have realized the need to invite the Court of Appeal to call for and examine the record and the

recommendation. In the course of the hearing in this Court, Mr. Kamalasabayson tendered the copies

of the recommendation made by the 3rd Respondent and undertook to make the 2nd Respondent's file

available whenever required. The 1st Respondent consented, in the interest of justice, to the case being

re- heard by the Court of Appeal, after calling for and examining the record and the recommendation."

However the above decision was not followed in Happuarachchi and Other vs. Commission of

Election and another by Supreme Court and ordered the respondents to re-consider the application

submitted by the Petitioners and to give reason for his decision following such re- consideration.

When considering the circumstances of this case, we have the advantage of going through the inquiry

proceeding submitted before this court by the respondent, where the 1st Respondent had considered the

circumstances under which the services of the 3rd Respondent were terminated.

As pointed out by the Counsel for the 3rd Respondent, the service extension offered by the Petitioner

Company with a promotion to the 3rd Respondent was not given to him on his request as submitted by

the petitioner but as evident by 3 RI the 3rd Respondent had submitted retirement papers when he

completed 55 years. At that stage instead of permitting him to retire from the service he was given a

promotion by document 2E. However, when the 3rd Respondent reached the age of 58, he submitted

resignation papers specially due to medical reasons. The 3rd Respondent took up the position that until

he submitted resignation papers on 3rd April 2012, he was not informed of any investigation pending

against him. The 3rd Respondent had resigned from his service with effect from 2nd May 2012 after

sending a resignation dated 30th April, but the petitioner has failed to satisfy the 1st Respondent (as

well as this court) of any steps the petitioner has taken to investigate the 3rd Respondent between 3rd

April to 2nd May other there the document produced marked P-4.

All the documents referred to above were before the 1st Respondent when he made order as evinced in

document P-ll. As pointed out by me earlier, the reasons given by the 1st Respondent is before this

court produced on behalf of the Respondents, and the court observes that the 1st Respondent had given

sufficient reasons to reject the request made by the Petitioner and to hold that the petitioner is liable to

f f

t I f , r ! 1 II I f f II

I! [ ! t I

t t

..

8

pay gratuity to the 3rd Respondent under the provisions of the Payment of Gratuity Act No 12 of 1983

(as amended)

I therefore conclude that the 1st and/or 2nd and/or 4th Respondent have come to a correct conclusion

having given reasons and giving reasonable opportunity to the petitioner and in the said circumstance

there are no grounds on which the reliefs as prayed for by the Petition could be granted

Accordingly I dismiss the Petitioner's Application with cost fixed at Rs. 50 000/-

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

H.C.J. MADAWALA,

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE CUORT OF APPEAL

Application is dismissed with cost.

f I,

I , i I I!t , r i

\ ! [ t I! t i