==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA(PHC)0029/2019

Page 1 of 8

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

Urban Development Authority,

27, D. R. Wijewardena Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

Presently of Sethsiripaya,

Sri Jayawardenapura Kotte,

Battaramulla.

Petitioner

Vs

Pushpa Lakmali,

No. 23/7, Kumbukgahapokuna Road,

Udahamulla,

Nugegoda.

Respondent

AND BETWEEN

Pushpa Lakmali,

No. 23/7, Kumbukgahapokuna Road,

Udahamulla,

Nugegoda.

Respondent-Petitioner

Vs

Court of Appeal Case No: CA(PHC)0029/2019 High Court of Colombo Revision Application: HCRA 07/16 Magistrate Court of Colombo Case No: 18006

CA(PHC)0029/2019

Page 2 of 8

1. Urban Development Authority,

Sethsiripaya,

Sri Jayawardenapura Kotte,

Battaramulla.

2. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Petitioner-Respondents

AND NOW BETWEEN

Pushpa Lakmali,

No. 23/7, Kumbukgahapokuna Road,

Udahamulla,

Nugegoda.

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

Vs

1. Urban Development Authority,

Sethsiripaya,

Sri Jayawardenapura Kotte,

Battaramulla.

2. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Petitioner-Respondent-Respondents

CA(PHC)0029/2019

Page 3 of 8

Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J.

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Counsel : Priyantha Alagiyawanna with Dulmi Jayasinghe

instructed by Nadeesha Alawatta for the

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant.

Abigail Jayakody, SC for the Petitioner-

Respondent-Respondents

Argued on : 16.10.2025

Written Submissions

of the

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

tendered on : 29.08.2023

Written Submissions

of the Petitioner-

-Respondent-Respondents

tendered on : 19.07.2024

Decided on : 30.01.2026

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

The instant appeal arises from an order of the learned High Court Judge of the

Western Province holden at Colombo dated 22.03.2019 (hereinafter called and

referred to as ‘the Order’) made in the case bearing No. HCRA 7/2016 wherein,

the learned High Court Judge of Colombo had dismissed an application in

revision preferred thereto by the Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant (hereinafter

CA(PHC)0029/2019

Page 4 of 8

called and referred to as ‘the Appellant’) against the order of the learned

Additional Magistrate of Nugegoda dated 12.01.2016, wherein he had made

order authorizing the 1st Petitioner-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter called

and referred to as ‘the 1st Respondent’) to demolish an unauthorized

construction erected by the Appellant on the premises as morefully, described in

the petition preferred thereto by the Respondent under and in terms of section

28A(3) of the Urban Development Authority Act No. 41 of 1978 as amended

(hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Act’) seeking an order for demolition of

the same. Being aggrieved by the order, the Appellant has now, preferred to this

Court the instant appeal on the grounds of appeal as morefully set out in

paragraph 15(a),(b) and (c) of the petition of appeal among any other grounds of

appeal that may be urged by Counsel at the hearing of this appeal and they may

be reproduced verbatim the same as follows;

“(a) The said order is contrary to law and facts disclose in evidence.

(b) The Honourable High Court Judge has failed to realize the hardship

caused to the Appellant in the event of demolishing three storied house.

(c) The Honourable High Court Judge has acted unreasonably by refusing

to accept the approved plan and the building plan tendered to Court while

the case was pending.”

The facts material and relevant to the instant appeal as is discernible from the

averments in the petition of appeal, may be briefly, set out as follows;

An application dated 08.07.2013 had been made by the Respondent to the

Magistrate Court of Nugegoda under and in terms of section 28A(3) of the Urban

Development Authority Act No. 41 of 1978 as amended praying for a demolition

order of an unauthorized construction erected by the Appellant on the premises

as morefully described in the petition preferred thereto by the Respondent along

with his application; that the Appellant had in her statement of objections,

CA(PHC)0029/2019

Page 5 of 8

sought to dismiss the application in-limine for the reasons stated therein; that

however, the learned Additional Magistrate of Nugegoda had having inquired into

and considered the application so made by the Respondent and the showing

cause so tendered thereto by the Appellant, proceeded in his order dated

12.01.2016, to grant the application of the Respondent authorizing him to

demolish the unauthorized construction; that being aggrieved by the order of the

learned Additional Magistrate of Nugegoda, the Appellant had preferred an

application in revision therefrom to the High Court of the Western Province

holden at Colombo; that the learned High Court Judge of Colombo had in the

order, proceeded to dismiss the application in revision by holding that the

Appellant had not disclosed any exceptional circumstances warranting Court to

exercise its extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction vested in it in revision of the

order. It is this order, that the Appellant now, seeks to impugn before us in the

instant appeal.

It is in this backdrop of the case, I would think it expedient at this juncture to

examine the propriety and/or legal soundness of the order of the learned High

Court Judge of Colombo sought to be impugned and set aside by the Appellant

in the instant appeal.

In an application made by the Respondent to a Magistrate Court under and in

terms of the provisions of section 28A(3) of the Act seeking an order for

demolition of an unauthorized construction allegedly, erected by the party

noticed under the Act, the pivotal question that would arise before the learned

Magistrate for consideration is whether the construction in question has been

effected by the person noticed upon a valid permit. Hence, existence of a valid

permit is the only valid defence that may be raised by a party noticed under the

Act to an application made to a Magistrate Court under section 28A(3) of the Act.

Therefore, the burden of showing that the construction in question had been

done on a valid permit will solely, rest on the person noticed.

CA(PHC)0029/2019

Page 6 of 8

It is significant to observe that although, the Appellant had clearly, and

unequivocally admitted, that the construction in question had already, been

constructed by her at the time of the application being made to the Magistrate

Court of Nugegoda under and in terms of the provisions of section 28A(3) of the

Act, she had never shown to Court that the construction in question had been

effected by her upon a valid permit issued by the Respondent to her under and

in terms of the provisions of the Act.

Hence, the Appellant had not in any manner, discharged the burden of proof so

rested in her by producing a valid permit in respect of the construction in

question as rightly, held both by the learned Additional Magistrate of Nugegoda

as well as the learned High Court Judge of Colombo.

However, it is significant to observe that the Appellant had afterwards, made a

futile attempt to show for the first time before the High Court of Colombo in the

application in revision and then, before this Court in this appeal that the

Respondent had granted to her a Development Permit to construct the

construction in question by producing both to the High Court and this Court, a

Development Permit dated 01.07.2-016 purportedly, issued by the Chairman,

Urban Council, Maharagama by and on behalf of the Respondent-Urban

Development Authority.

Upon a careful scrutiny of the so-called Development Permit, it becomes

abundantly, clear without an iota of doubt that it had been issued by the

Chairman, Urban Council, Maharagama only on 01.07.2016 solely, for the

purpose of constructing a new house and not for the purpose of regularising the

unauthorized construction so effected by the Appellant.

It is in this context, it is significant to observe that the application under section

28A(3) of the Act for a demolition order had been made to Court by the

Respondent on 08.07.2013 and the demolition order in pursuant thereto, had

been made by the learned Magistrate of Nugegoda on 12.01.2016-long before the

CA(PHC)0029/2019

Page 7 of 8

purported Development Permit had been issued to the Appellant to construct a

new house. Therefore, it clearly, appears that it was not a Development Permit

issued to her by the Respondent in respect of the construction in question in the

application filed before the Magistrate Court of Nugegoda under section 28A(3)

of the Act but for a construction of a new house only.

It is no doubt that the Appellant had thus, clearly, attempted to mislead both

the High Court as well as this Court by misrepresenting that construction in

question had been done by her upon a valid Development Permit issued to her

by the Respondent by furnishing for the first time to the High Court of Colombo

and thereafter, to this Court in this appeal a Development Permit issued to her

by the Urban Council of Maharagama acting on behalf of the Respondent only,

on 01.07.2016-on a day after the demolition order was made by the learned

Additional Magistrate of Nugegoda on 12.01.2016 as rightly, held by the learned

High Court Judge of Colombo in the application in revision.

In view of the above, it clearly, appears to me that the order complained of,

cannot in any manner, be regarded and/or construed as one that is palpably

wrong and/or one tainted with illegality and/or one of such a nature that had

shocked the conscience of the Court and/or one that had caused positive

miscarriage of justice to the Appellant.

Hence, I would hold that the Appellant had not in any manner, shown any

exceptional circumstances warranting the exercise of the extra-ordinary

revisionary jurisdiction vested in the learned High Court Judge of Colombo in

revision of the order complained of, as rightly, held by the learned High Court

Judge of Colombo.

In the circumstances, I would hold that the learned High Court Judge of Colombo

was entirely, right both in fact and law in dismissing the application in revision

filed before it by the Appellant by holding that the Appellant had not disclosed

to Court any exceptional circumstances warranting invocation of extra-ordinary

CA(PHC)0029/2019

Page 8 of 8

revisionary jurisdiction vested in it in revision of the order sought to be revised

by the Appellant and therefore, there was no reason to interfere with the order

of the learned Additional Magistrate of Nugegoda for; he had come to the

impugned decision after having considered all the facts and circumstances and

the law applicable thereto.

In the circumstances, I would hold that the application in revision is not entitled

to succeed both in fact and law and as such, it ought to have been dismissed in-

limine as rightly, done by the learned High Court Judge of Colombo.

In the circumstances, I would see no error whatsoever, in the orders of both-the

learned Additional Magistrate of Nugegoda as well as the learned High Court

Judge of Colombo.

In view of the foregoing, I would hold that appeal is not entitled to succeed both

in fact and law and as such it should be dismissed in-limine.

In the result, I would proceed to dismiss the instant appeal with costs of this

Court fixed at Rs. 50,000/- payable by the Appellant to the Respondent apart

from the costs ordered by the learned High Court Judge of Colombo.

I would thus, affirm both the orders of the learned Additional Magistrate of

Nugegoda and the Learned High Court Judge of the Western Province holden at

Colombo.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL