Page 1 of 9

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

Siddadurage Kalyani Silva

No. 130/4, Arunodaya Mawatha,

Kottawa Road, Maviththara,

Piliyandala.

Petitioner

Vs.

1. Sri Jayawardenepura General Hospital

Board

Thalapathpitiya,

Nugegoda.

2. Prof. S. D. Jayaratne

Chairman,

Sri Jayawardenepura General

Hospital,

Thalapathpitiya,

Nugegoda.

3. Dr. Rathnasiri A. Hewage

Director,

Sri Jayawardenepura General

In the matter of an application for Mandates in

the nature of Writs of Certiorari and Mandamus

under and in terms of Article 140 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic

of Sri Lanka.

CA/WRIT/35/2021

Page 2 of 9

Hospital,

Thalapathpitiya,

Nugegoda.

4. Dr. S. Sridharan

Director General,

Sri Jayawardenepura General

Hospital,

Thalapathpitiya,

Nugegoda.

5. Dr. J. R. C. Jayathilake,

Treasury Representative,

Sri Jayawardenepura General

Hospital,

Thalapathpitiya,

Nugegoda.

6. Janaka Sri Chandraguptha

Health Ministry Representative,

Sri Jayawardenepura General

Hospital,

Thalapathpitiya,

Nugegoda.

7. Dr. V. K. P. Indraratne

Consultant,

Sri Jayawardenepura General

Hospital,

Thalapathpitiya,

Nugegoda.

Page 3 of 9

8. Dr. P. J. Ambawatte

Consultant,

Sri Jayawardenepura General

Hospital,

Thalapathpitiya,

Nugegoda.

9. Madhawa Karunaratne

Consultant,

Sri Jayawardenepura General

Hospital,

Thalapathpitiya,

Nugegoda.

10. Bhashwara Gunarathna

11. Manjula Weerakkody

12. Senaka Rajapakse

Director PGIM

13. Ruwanthika Gunawardhana

Board Secretary cum Legal Officer,

Sri Jayawardenepura General

Hospital,

Thalapathpitiya,

Nugegoda.

Respondents

Page 4 of 9

Before : Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

Dhammika Ganepola J.

Counsel : Jagath Nanayakkara for the Petitioner.

Manohara Jayasinghe, DSG for the Respondents.

Argued on : 05.05.2021

Written Submissions : Petitioner - 08.06.2022

Respondents - 17.06.2022

Decided on : 10.08.2022

Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

The Petitioner in this application seeks to challenge;

a) the decision of the Respondents, dated 31.07.2020, taken at the 441st Board meeting of

the Sri Jayawardenepura General Hospital (SJGH) to suspend the post of Staff

Assistant;

b) the decision of the Respondents, dated 27.08.2020, taken at the 442nd Board meeting

of the SJGH to revert back the Petitioner to the post of Management Assistant from

the post of Staff Assistant;

c) the decision of the Respondents, dated 24.09.2020, taken at the 443rd Board meeting

of the SJGH to reduce the salary and/or the salary grade of the Petitioner from MN3

category to MN2 Grade/category.

Further, the Petitioner is seeking for a mandate in the nature of a writ of Mandamus directing

the 1st to 13th Respondents to reinstate and/or allow the Petitioner to serve in the post of Staff

Assistant with back wages.

Page 5 of 9

The Petitioner was appointed to the post of Clerk Grade III at the SJGH on permanent basis

from 23.07.1985. The Petitioner having completed five years of service in the aforementioned

post, was promoted to the post of clerical and allied service Grade I on 23.07.2000.

The designation of Clerk was changed as Management Assistant in compliance with the

Circular dated 13.05.2003 issued by the then Secretary to the Ministry of Health, Nutrition

and Welfare. The Petitioner was thereafter placed at the Health Management Assistant Grade

I of the SJGH by letter dated 28.08.2003, marked P5, as a consequence to the decision taken

by the Board of SJGH on 15.07.2003.

The Chairman of the Board of SJGH by a letter dated 01.11.2012, marked P6, informed the

Petitioner that the designations of the Health Management Assistant and Stenographer

were changed to Management Assistant and further, all the services pertaining to the post

of Health Management Assistant were absorbed in to the Government Management Service

in alignment with the Extraordinary Gazette Notification No. 1372/23 (dated 26.12.2004).

The Board of SJGH on 21.01.2016, at its 396th meeting (minutes are marked as P7), took a

decision regarding the criteria for the creation of the post of Chief Management Assistant as

per the guidelines in the Public Administration Circular bearing No. 06/2016. At the said

meeting the Board decided to appoint Chief Management Assistants after obtaining the

approval from the Department of Management Services and also to advertise the said post

internally.

Subsequently, the 3rd Respondent - Director of the SJGH by way of a notice dated 07.07.2017,

marked P8, has called for applications for the post of Staff Assistant from the internal

officers who possessed the required qualifications. The Petitioner applied for the said post as

she had fulfilled the requisite qualifications and she was informed by a letter dated 04.09.2017

(marked as P13) that the Board of SJGH had decided to appoint her as a Staff Assistant with

effect from 01.09.2017. The letter of appointment dated 12.09.2017, marked P14, is

composed of the terms and conditions of the service.

After completing a period of one year, the Petitioners appointment to the post of Staff

Assistant was confirmed with effect from 01.09.2017 by letter dated 14.09.2018 marked P15.

Page 6 of 9

In a later development, the Board of SJGH took a decision on 31.07.2020 at the 441st Board

meeting (minutes are marked as P19) to suspend the post of Staff Assistant. Thereafter, at

the 442nd meeting held on 27.08.2020 (minutes are marked as P20), the Board has decided

to strictly adhere to the decision of the 441st meeting and to revert the Staff Assistant post

back to the post of Management Assistant. On 10.09.2020 through letter marked P21, the

2nd Respondent has communicated the decision taken at the 442nd meeting to the Petitioner.

As a result, the Board has taken a decision at the 443rd meeting on 24.09.2020 (minutes are

marked as P23(a)) to change the salary step of the Petitioner from MN 3 category to MN 2

category and such was made aware to the Petitioner by the 2nd Respondent by letter dated

23.10.2020 marked P23(b). The issues raised by the Petitioner in the instant application

emanates from the said decision in P23(a).

In light of the above, the main grievance of the Petitioner is that the said decision taken by

the members of the Board on 24.09.2020 affected the salary drawn by her over a period of

two years and as a consequence, she has been placed on a lower salary scale. Petitioners

contention is that such decision of the Board is violative of her legitimate expectation and is

baseless/irrational/unreasonable/illegal/ultra vires.

At this stage, it is necessary to ascertain whether adequate reasons have been given by the

Board to reduce the salary of the Petitioner and if so, what those reasons are. The only reason

which appears in the minutes of the 443rd meeting (P23(a)) in its particular paragraph under

the heading Reporting irregular appointments at SJGH vide item 442:02.3 is as follows;

The Board decided that when the post is reverted back, automatically their salaries need to be

placed to the appropriate salary scale of their current post. (Emphasis added)

Therefore, the reason to place the Petitioner on a lower salary scale appears to be a mere

opinion formed by the said Board itself and not based on a reason in compliance of any law

or regulation. It is observed that the said Board has not considered any rationale to reduce the

salary and instead opined that the salary scales would be automatically reverted due to the

changes in the designation. The vires of changing the designation of the Petitioner is also

being highly challenged in this application.

Page 7 of 9

Although the Establishment Code is not directly applicable to SJGH, I need to draw my

attention to the rationale adopted in its provisions of Chapter VII of the said Code which

deals with salaries. The Clause 9:1 of the Establishment Code stipulates that when an officer

who had prior service under government whether in a permanent or temporary capacity,

secures a fresh appointment under the government, he may be given incremental credit for

the prior service as mentioned therein. I am aware that those provisions mainly deal with the

increments entitled to an employee but what is necessary to abstract from those provisions is

the particular rationale adopted therein. In those provisions, a proper mechanism has been

introduced for an employee to secure another position within the government sector without

any hinderance to the rights in reference to his or her previous service in the government

sector. The usual practice is that if a government servant secures another position within the

government sector, subject to necessary sanctions, such person would be placed at the fitting

salary step of the new salary scale without discriminating rights of such person.

Anyhow, it doesnt appear that any such effective rationale has been adopted by the Board of

SJGH when taking the decision to reduce the salary of the Petitioner or change her salary

scale. The phrase used by the said Board when arriving at the said impugned decision in

P23(a) is automatically. I cannot accept any reason for deduction of the salary or placing

the Petitioner at a different salary scale only based on the term automatically without

enumerating a proper rationale for the decision. I take the view that the Board of SJGH has

failed to give adequate and lawful reasons for deducting the salary and also, I am unable to

accept the opinion of the said Board that automatically a persons salary needs to be changed

merely based on the salary scale applicable to the reverted post.

The Petitioners argument is that the post of Chief Management Assistant and Staff

Assistant is one and the same. However, the Respondent totally deny such assertions. The

Respondents contention is that any change/alteration in the name of post within the SJGH

should be approved by both the Board of Management of SJGH and the Department of

Management Services. The Respondents further allege that the stand taken by the Petitioner

is not acceptable as no such board decision or a relevant document has been produced by the

Petitioner.

Page 8 of 9

Anyhow, I am unable to accept the defense taken up by the Respondents as the change of

designation has been effected not due to a request of the Petitioner but done solely on the

desire of the Board of the SJGH. The failure on the duty of obtaining necessary approvals

from the Department of Management Services by the SJGH should not affect the rights of

any employee who will eventually be bound by decisions of the Board whether such decisions

are right or wrong.

My attention now shifts to Section 19 of the Shop and Office Employees (Regulation of

Employment and Remuneration) Act 19 of 1954 (as amended). The Section 19(1)(a) provides

that the employer of a shop or office shall, subject to the provisions of the said section, pay

such remuneration in legal tender directly to such person without any deduction other than

an authorised deduction, as defined therein, made with the consent of such person. In terms

of the interpretation section of the said Act, Remuneration means salary or wages including

other items mentioned in the said section.

Salary is a periodical payment which may be specified in an employment contract, made by

an employer to the employee. Monthly salary to an employee who looks forward for a specific

sum by the end of the month for the services rendered by him, has a major impact on social

structure theories which deals with several problems in how society is structured. In my view

this includes family, religion, law, economy & class etc. Therefore, I am of the view that when

an employer, without the consent of such employee, takes a decision to reduce, deduct or

suspend an existing salary of an employee including the change of salary scale, such employer

should follow a procedure, according to law, where the decision making power may;

a. not trespass unduly on personal rights and liberties of the employee,

b. not infringe the rule of law and the rule of natural justice,

c. not violate any law, regulation & duly issued government circulars/directions.

For the reasons set forth above, I take the view that the Board of SJGH has taken irrelevant

facts in to consideration or has not taken relevant facts in to consideration and as such the

decision of the said Board reflected in P23(a) is irrational and unreasonable. Furthermore,

the Board of the SJGH has not given lawful reasons to reduce the salary of the Petitioner and

the relevant decisions affect the rights of the Petitioner. Hence, I proceed to issue a mandate

Page 9 of 9

in the nature of a writ of Certiorari as prayed for in paragraph (d) of the prayer of the Petition

of the Petitioner.

Moreover, I am not inclined to grant other reliefs as prayed for by the Petitioner and I have

arrived at that decision based on the defense taken up by the Respondents. The contention of

the Respondents is that they were compelled to suspend the appointments made to the post

of Staff Assistant as the required approval of the Department of the Management Services

had not been obtained to establish the said post of Staff Assistant.

I am aware that the Public Sector cadre management, remuneration management and

consultancy are also among the objectives of the Department of Management Services. It is a

prime duty of the said Department to provide the necessary management service assistance

to the Public Sector Organizations. Accordingly, I take the view that this Court should not

trespass the authority of the Department of Management Services at this stage substituting or

recommending any decision of this Court for that of the said authority in reference to the

change of designations of SJGH. It is the duty of the Board of SJGH to resolve, according to

law, the issues on changing the designations of the employees.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Dhammika Ganepola J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal