1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for Writs of Certiorari, Mandamus and Prohibition under Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

CA (Writ) Application No: 225/2012

A.J. Mallawaarachchi, No. 7/22, Devala Road, Katuwana, Homagama.

PETITIONER

Vs. 1. Tower Hall Theatre Foundation. 2. D.M. Jayaratne Esqr., Prime Minister, Chairman, Tower Hall Theatre Foundation. 3. T.B. Ekanayake Esqr., Minister of Cultural Affairs and the Arts. 4. Geethanjana Gunawardena Esqr., Deputy Minister of Finance & Planning. 5. A.L.M. Athaullah Esqr., Minister of Local Government and Provincial Councils. 6. Sirisena Amarasekera Esqr, Secretary to the Prime Minister. 7. Wimal Rubesinghe Esqr., Secretary to the Minister of Cultural Affairs and the Arts. 8. Gotabaya Jayaratne Esqr., Secretary to the Minister of Education.

9. Vijitha Kanugala Esqr., Director of Cultural Affairs and the Arts.

2

10. A.J.M. Musammil Esqr.,

Mayor, Municipal Council, Colombo. 11. Mrs. Badrani Jayawardena,

Commissioner, Municipal Council, Colombo. 12. U.J.P.A. Kirindigoda Esqr.,

Attorney-at-Law. 13. Mahinda Abeysundera Esqr., 14. G.R. Perera Esqr., 15. Chandana Wickremasinghe Esqr., 16. Jayantha Warakagoda Esqr.,

All members of the Board of Trustees, Tower Hall Theater Foundation.

17. Douglas Siriwardena Esqr.,

Director General, Tower Hall Theater Foundation. 18. K.C. Jayaratne Esqr.,

Retired Sri Lanka Administrative Service, 78/2, Old Kesbewa Road, Nugegoda. 19. U.L. Ariyapala Esqr.,

Retired Accountant, C/o. Tower Hall Theater Foundation, Sausiripaya, No. 123, Wijerama Mawatha, Colombo 7. 20. Ranil Wickremasinghe Esqr.,

Chairman/Hon. Prime Minister. 20A. Mahinda Rajapaksa,

Chairman/Hon. Prime Minister. 21. S.D. Navinna Esqr.,

Hon. Minister of Internal Affairs, Wayamba Development and Cultural Affairs. 21A. Dr. Wijedasa Rajapaksha Esqr.,

3

Hon. Minister of Higher Education and Cultural Affairs.

21AA. Mahinda Rajapaksha Esqr.,

Hon. Minister of Buddha Sasana Cultural and Religious Affairs. 22. Ravi Karunanayake Esqr.,

Hon. Minister of Finance. 22A. Mangala Samaraweera Esqr.,

Hon. Minister of Finance. 22AA.Mahinda Rajapaksa Esqr.,

Hon. Minister of Finance. 23. Faiszer Musthapha Esqr.,

Hon. Minister of Local Government and Provincial Council. 23A. Janaka Bandara Tennakoon Esqr.,

Hon. Minister of Public Administration Home Affairs, Provincial Council and Local Government. 24. Saman Ekanayake Esqr., Secretary to the Hon. Prime Minister. 24A. Gamini Senerath Esqr., Secretary to the Hon.Prime Minister. 25. W.M. Bandusena Esqr.,

Secretary to the Ministry of Education 25A. Sunil Hettiarachchi Esqr.,

Secretary to the Ministry of Education. 25AA N.H.M. Chithrananda

Secretary to the Ministry of Education. 26. D. Swarnapala Esqr.,

Secretary to the Ministry of Internal Affairs, Wayamba Development and Cultural Affairs.

4

26A. J.J. Rathnasiri Esqr.,

Secretary to the Minister of Higher Education and Cultural Affairs. 26AA. K.M. Bandula Harischandra,

Secretary to the Ministry of Buddha Sasana, Cultural and Religious Affairs.

27. V.K.A. Anura Esqr.,

Municipal Commissioner, Colombo Municipal Council.

27A. Eng. Lalith Wickramaratne Esqr.,

Municipal Commissioner, Colombo Municipal Council.

27AA. Palitha Nanayakkara,

Municipal Commissioner, Colombo Municipal Council.

28. Ms. Anusha Gokula Esqr.,

Director of Cultural Affairs., 29. Lucian Bulathsinghala Esqr., 30. Dharmasiri Bandaranayake Esqr., 31. Jerome De Silva Esqr., 32. Prem Dissanayake Esqr., 33. M. Adhikari,

Attorney-at-Law. 34. Lionel Fernando,

Director General.

34A. Thissa Hewavithana,

Director General.

35. Mrs. Rosy Senanayake,

Mayor of the Colombo Municipal Council

All members of the Board of Trustees. Tower Hall Theatre Foundation Sausiripaya No. 123, Wijerama Mawatha, Colombo 7.

RESPONDENTS

5

Before: Arjuna Obeyesekere, J / President of the Court of Appeal Counsel: Jacob Joseph with J.G. Sadini Rameshika for the Petitioner

Milinda Gunatilake, Additional Solicitor General for the Respondents Argued on: 16th July 2020 Written Tendered on behalf of the Petitioner on 25th November 2019 and 3rd

Submissions September 2020 Tendered on behalf of the Respondents on 21st June 2019 and 16th November 2020 Decided on: 3rd June 2021

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J., P/CA

The Petitioner, an employee of the 1st Respondent, the Tower Hall Theatre Foundation

has filed this application, seeking inter alia the following relief:

a) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the letter dated 24th March 2011 marked P23 by

which the Petitioner was placed on compulsory leave;

b) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the letter dated 13th June 2012 marked P34 by which

the Petitioner had been placed under interdiction with effect from 7th June 2012;

c) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the charge sheet dated 27th June 2012 marked P35

served on the Petitioner;

d) A Writ of Mandamus to reinstate the Petitioner in the post of Director (Finance);

e) A Writ of Prohibition preventing the 1st 17th Respondents from conducting a

domestic inquiry against the Petitioner.

6

On 22nd October 2012, this Court has issued an ex-parte interim order restraining the

Respondents from holding a domestic inquiry pending the final determination of this

application. When this matter was taken up for argument on 16th July 2020, the learned

Counsel for the Petitioner informed this Court that the Petitioner would not be pursuing

the aforementioned Writs of Mandamus and Prohibition as the Petitioner had reached

the age of retirement 60 years in 2019, leaving this Court to only consider the Writs

of Certiorari to quash P23, P34 and P35.

The facts of this matter very briefly are as follows.

The Petitioner states that he was employed at the Building Materials Corporation as an

Accounts Assistant from 1st October 1985. By letter dated 8th January 1987 marked R2,

the Petitioner had been released by the Building Materials Corporation to the 1st

Respondent to work as its Accountant. The Petitioner claims that the Building Materials

Corporation promoted him as Accountant - Grade IV in 1987 and as Accountant Grade

III in 1991, but that he continued to work for the 1st Respondent.

By letter dated 29th January 1993, marked R3, the Petitioner was informed that he had

been absorbed to the National Housing Development Authority as Accountant Grade

V. The Petitioner admits that he consented to the said absorption. The Respondents

submit that by its decision dated 11th January 1995 marked R7, the Cabinet of

Ministers had approved the absorption of the Petitioner to the permanent staff of the

1st Respondent. This decision however had been reversed by the Cabinet of Ministers, as

borne out by the decision of the Cabinet of Ministers dated 26th July 1995 marked R8.

In terms of R8, the six persons named therein, including the Petitioner, were to be

released to their previous places of employment. Thus, in terms of the decision of the

Cabinet of Ministers, the Petitioner was required to report to the National Housing

Development Authority.

By letter dated 24th August 1995 marked R11 the 1st Respondent had directed the

Petitioner to report to the Ministry of Housing on 1st September 1995. Even though the

Petitioner had handed over his duties at the 1st Respondent on 1st September 1995

7

vide R12 and R13- the Petitioner had informed the 1st Respondent that he would not

report for duty at the Ministry of Housing in view of an appeal filed by him. The

Petitioner had been repeatedly advised by the 1st Respondent as well as the National

Housing Development Authority to report for duty vide letters marked R14, R15 and

R16. The Petitioner however had failed to do so, prompting the National Housing

Development Authority to treat the Petitioner as having vacated his post on 23rd

December 1995 vide R17.

Prior to R17 i.e. on 25th September 1995 - the Petitioner had filed an application in

the Labour Tribunal alleging that the 1st Respondent had terminated his services with

effect from 1st September 1995. It is clear that the 1st Respondent was only complying

with a decision of the Cabinet of Ministers when it directed the Petitioner to report to

the Ministry of Housing. In spite of the 1st Respondent not having issued the Petitioner

with a letter of appointment as at that date and the 1st Respondent taking up the

position that the Petitioner was not an employee, the Labour Tribunal, by its order

delivered on 5th March 1999 marked P3a, had held with the Petitioner and directed

that the Petitioner be reinstated in the same post that he held at the 1st Respondent

with back wages, or in the alternative to pay the Petitioner a sum of Rs. 651,106 as

compensation. Although the 1st Respondent had filed an appeal against the said Order

in the High Court of the Western Province holden at Colombo, the said appeal had been

withdrawn.

The Petitioner had accordingly resumed duties at the 1st Respondent on 5th April 2002.

This would perhaps be an appropriate stage to discuss the specific designation of the

post held by the Petitioner in the 1st Respondent, as this issue seems to have soured the

relationship between the parties, and given rise to the issuance of the letter P23.

As noted earlier, the Petitioner had not been issued with a letter of appointment by the

1st Respondent. It is not disputed that the Petitioner assumed duties at the 1st

Respondent in 1987 in the post of Accountant. The Respondents state that on 1st

February 1995, Mr. Ranjith Dharmakeerthi assumed duties as the Director General of

the 1st Respondent (vide R4). The Respondents state further that the Petitioner, by a

8

letter written on the same date marked R5, had represented himself to the new

Director General that his designation is Director (Finance) and had thereafter continued

to refer to himself as Director (Finance) of the 1st Respondent.

The Respondents however state that the proper designation of the Petitioner is not

Director (Finance) but Accountant, as borne out by the following:

Letter dated 8th February 1995, marked R5A;

Letter dated 8th March 1995, marked R6;1

Board paper dated 19th September 1995, marked R9;

Letter dated 24th August 1995, marked R11; and

Letter dated 11th January 1996, marked R17.

By its decision taken on 7th August 1996 marked R21, the Cabinet of Ministers had

changed the designation of Director (Finance) in the 1st Respondent to Accountant.

While the above change in designation took place during the period the Petitioners

application was pending in the Labour Tribunal, by the time the Petitioner assumed

duties at the 1st Respondent, there was no such post by the designation of Director

(Finance). Be that as it may, having resumed duties at the 1st Respondent, at the request

of the Petitioner vide P8- the Petitioner had been issued with a letter of appointment

in the post of Director (Finance) vide P11a and P11b.

The issue that culminated in the Petitioner being sent on compulsory leave in March

2011 arose in June 2007, when the Petitioner, by his letter dated 19th June 2007 marked

R23 sought the payment of four salary increments arising from the absorption of the

Petitioner to the 1st Respondent in January 1995. Although the Senior Manager

(Administration) of the 1st Respondent had rejected R23, at the request of the

Petitioner, the matter had been submitted to the Director General of the 1st

Respondent. The Director General had placed this issue before the Board of Trustees of

the 1st Respondent, which in turn had decided to refer the issue to the Internal Audit

Division of the Ministry of Cultural Affairs.

1 R6 has been issued by the NHDA when the Petitioner was released to the 1st Respondent.

9

The Internal Audit Division, while holding that the Petitioner is not entitled to any

increments, had pointed out the above discrepancy relating to the designation of the

post held by the Petitioner vide reports marked R26 and R26a. The Board of

Trustees of the 1st Respondent, having considered the said reports, had arrived at a

decision dated 16th June 2009 marked R27 to implement the decision of the

Cabinet of Ministers R21 to re-designate the post of Director (Finance) as

Accountant. The Board of Trustees had decided further to appoint the Petitioner to the

post of Accountant and to continue to pay him the salary and other allowances that

were being paid as at that date. This decision had been communicated to the Petitioner

by letter dated 23rd June 2009, marked P15. The Petitioner is not challenging this letter

in this application.

The Petitioner, being dissatisfied by P15 had appealed against the said decision, on the

basis that the order of the Labour Tribunal was to reinstate him in the post of Director

(Finance) and that any re-designation is illegal. I must state that in its award, the Labour

Tribunal did not specify the designation in which the Petitioner should be reinstated,

except to state that the Petitioner should be reinstated in the same post he held prior to

1st September 1995. As I have observed, even as at 1st September 1995, there was

ambiguity as to the nomenclature of the post held by the Petitioner. This was however

laid to rest with the aforementioned decision R21 of the Cabinet of Ministers. Thus, by

the time the Petitioner assumed duties in 2002, there was no post by the name of

Director (Finance) and the Petitioner should therefore have been reinstated in the post

of Accountant. I therefore do not see any illegality in the decision reflected in P15. I

must reiterate that the terms of employment of the Petitioner and the emoluments paid

to the Petitioner were not affected by P15.

In addition to the appeal to the Board of Trustees, the Petitioner had lodged an appeal

with the Secretary to the Prime Minister vide R30, probably for the reason that the

Prime Minister is the Chairman of the Board of Trustees of the 1st Respondent, and the

10

Secretary to the Prime Minister is a member of the Board of Trustees.2 This appeal

culminated in:

a) The Director General of the 1st Respondent tendering a report dated 16th

November 2010, marked R32 to the Secretary to the Prime Minister;

b) The Secretary to the Prime Minister appointing Mr. Mahinda Bandusena, a retired

Additional Secretary to the Prime Minister, to consider R32;

c) The Board of Trustees considering R32 and arriving at a decision on 24th March

2011, marked R34 to place the Petitioner on compulsory leave as R32 had

disclosed several breaches of discipline by the Petitioner;

d) A decision by the Board of Trustees that a preliminary investigation must be

conducted into the said incidents of misconduct;

e) The Petitioner being informed of the said decision by P23 dated 24th March 2011.

The Director General of the 1st Respondent had appointed Mr. U.H. Liyanage to conduct

a preliminary investigation. However, as a result of Mr. Mahinda Bandusena expressing

the view in his report dated 20th April 2011 marked R37, that the post of Director

(Finance) had been abolished by the Cabinet of Ministers in 1996 and is therefore a non-

existent position, the Secretary, Ministry of Culture and the Arts too had appointed a

three member Committee to conduct a preliminary investigation against the Petitioner.

For this reason, the Board of Trustees of the 1st Respondent had discontinued with the

preliminary investigation of Mr. U.H. Liyanage and decided to proceed with the above

three committee.

By its report dated 22nd August 2011 marked R45, the three member committee had

pointed out several irregularities relating to the activities of the Petitioner, and had

recommended that a more detailed investigation be carried out by a person with a legal

background. The Board of Trustees of the 1st Respondent had thereafter directed the

2 Vide Section 3(1)(a) and (e), respectively.

11

Director General to comply with the said recommendation. Even though the Director

General had requested Mr. U.H. Liyanage to conduct the inquiry, due to objections

raised by the Petitioner, the Board of Trustees had decided not to proceed with Mr.

Liyanage, and had requested the Secretary to the Prime Minister to appoint a suitable

officer to conduct the preliminary investigation. The Board of Trustees having approved

the appointment of the 18th Respondent (K.C. Jayaratne) vide R49 the 18th

Respondent had conducted the investigation together with U.L. Ariyapala, in the course

of which a statement from the Petitioner had been recorded. By his report marked

R52, the 18th Respondent had recommended as follows:

fuu ks,Odrshd rcfha uqo,a jxpd iy.;j ,ndf.k we;. Wiia ks,Odrska fj; wi;H

f;dr;=re imhd tu ks,OdrSkaf.ka whq;= jdis ,nd.ekSug lghq;= lr we;. l+G f,aLK ilia

lr Wiia ks,OdrSka fkdu. hjd we;. fuu ks,Odrshdf.a jsIudpdrhka iusnkaOfhka

jskhdkql+,j lghq;= lsrSu iqoqiqh.

The 18th Respondent had also submitted a draft charge sheet for the consideration of

the 1st Respondent.

The Board of Trustees of the 1st Respondent, having considered R52 had arrived at the

following decision on 7th June 2012 vide R53:

.KldOsldrs ta fca u,jrwdrpsps uy;d iusnkaOfhka uQ,sl jsuraYk jdra;dj iy fpdaokd m;% flgqusm; gjra fyda,a r.y, mokfus .KldOsldrs ta fcA u,jrwdrpsps uy;d iusnkaOfhka uQ,sl jsuraYkhla meje;ajSug m;al< uQ,sl jsuraYk ks,Odrs fla iS chr;ak uy;d iy hQ t,a wdrshmd, hk uy;ajreka jsiska tu mrSCIK ksulr ,ndfok ,o uQ,sl jsuraYk jdra;dj iy fpdaokd m;%h fuu m;s%ldfjka bosrsm;a lr ;snqks. 02 Wla; jsuraYk jdra;dfjs ksrafoaYhka i,ld ne,Q Ndrldr uKav,h ta fcA u,jrwdrpsps uy;df.a fiajh cQks ui 07 jeks osk isg w;aysgqjd fpdaokd m;%h ksl+;a lr jsOsu;a jskh

mrSCIKhla meje;ajSug lghq;= lrk f,i Wmfoia fouska ta i|yd wkque;sh ,ndfok ,oS.

The 1st Respondent had thereafter interdicted the Petitioner and served the charge

sheet P35.

12

Aggrieved by the decision to serve a charge sheet, the Petitioner filed this application,

seeking inter alia Writs of Certiorari to quash the Charge Sheet (P35), as well as the

letter by which the Petitioner had been sent on compulsory leave (P23) and the letter

by which the Petitioner had been placed under interdiction (P34).

In considering the relief sought by the Petitioner, I must bear in mind the three grounds

identified by Lord Diplock in Council of Civil Service Unions vs Minister for the Civil

Service3 as being the grounds upon which administrative action is subject to control by

judicial review. The first is 'illegality', the second is 'irrationality' and the third is

'procedural impropriety'.

The learned Counsel for the Petitioner submitted that the issue relating to his

designation has already been decided by the Labour Tribunal and that the same matter

is being raised by the Respondents through the various charges in P35. This is a

defence that must be presented by the Petitioner to the Inquiry Officer and it is not the

function of this Court to decide on such issues.

The Petitioner is not complaining that the actions of the Respondents are irrational. The

complaint of the Petitioner is that the 1st Respondent acted illegally and did not follow

the proper procedure when it issued the aforementioned three letters.

Illegality and Procedural Impropriety have been described by Lord Diplock in the

following manner:

By 'illegality' as a ground for judicial review I mean that the decision maker must

understand correctly the law that regulates his decision making power and must

give effect to it.

I have described the third head as 'procedural impropriety' rather than failure to

observe basic rules of natural justice or failure to act with procedural fairness

towards the person who will be affected by the decision. This is because

3 1985 AC 374

13

susceptibility to judicial review under this head covers also failure by an

administrative tribunal to observe procedural rules that are expressly laid down in

the legislative instrument by which its jurisdiction is conferred, even where such

failure does not involve any denial of natural justice."

The 1st Respondent has been established by the Tower Hall Theatre Foundation Act No.

1 of 1978. The powers of the 1st Respondent are set out in Section 7. In terms of Section

7(2)(e), the 1st Respondent has the power to appoint, employ and remunerate officers

and servants of the Foundation and to make rules regarding the appointment,

promotion, remuneration and disciplinary control of its employees and the grant of leave

and other benefits to them.

The Petitioner has produced marked P1, the Manual of the 1st Respondent issued in

1997. The disciplinary procedure relating to employees is set out in Parts 2 and 3 of

Chapter 2 and can be summarised as follows:

a) An employee can be interdicted or sent on compulsory leave where a preliminary

investigation reveals that he/she has been involved in any wrongdoing or where

such a course of action is in the best interests of the 1st Respondent vide

paragraph 11(a);

b) The proper authority who shall take the decision to interdict or send on

compulsory leave an employee of the 1st Respondent is its Director General vide

paragraph 11(b)(i);

c) Where the employee concerned is in an Executive Grade, the Board of Trustees

shall be informed of such decision vide paragraph 11(a);

d) The power to appoint a suitable person to carry out a preliminary investigation in

order to ascertain the veracity of the breach of discipline is with the Director

General vide paragraph 18(a);

14

e) Where the Director General is of the view that a disciplinary inquiry must be held

against an employee who is holding an executive position, he shall in the first

instance report such fact to the Board of Trustees vide paragraph 17;

f) A disciplinary inquiry can be held only where the Board of Trustees is of the view

that such an inquiry must be held vide paragraph 17;

g) While the Director (Administration) or a person nominated by him has been

entrusted with the task of preparing the charge sheet, the charge sheet should be

approved by the Director General vide paragraph 21.

Having identified the procedure laid down in the Manual P1, I shall now consider

whether the decision to (a) send the Petitioner on compulsory leave, (b) appoint an

officer to conduct a preliminary investigation, (c) interdict the Petitioner, and (d) issue a

charge sheet has been taken in accordance with the above provisions.

I have already observed that the entire process that culminated in the Petitioner being

issued a charge sheet commenced with the appeal made by the Petitioner himself to the

Secretary to the Prime Minister vide R30. What followed were a report by the

Director General (R32) and a report by a retired Additional Secretary to the Prime

Minister. R32 was considered by the Board of Trustees on 24th March 2011 and the

decision to place the Petitioner on compulsory leave was taken by the Board of Trustees

vide R34. It is therefore clear that the decision to send the Petitioner on compulsory

leave is in substantial compliance with the requirements of P1. The decision to conduct

a preliminary investigation has also been taken by the Board of Trustees vide R34. I

therefore do not see any illegality in the appointment of an Officer to conduct a

preliminary investigation.

As noted earlier, the preliminary investigation was conducted by a three member

committee, as well as by the 18th Respondent, who was appointed with the approval of

the Board of Trustees.

15

The decision to interdict the Petitioner has been taken by the Board of Trustees vide

R53. Furthermore, in terms of the Manual P1, the decision to conduct a disciplinary

inquiry must be taken by the Board of Trustees. This too has been complied with vide

the decision of the Board of Trustees marked R53.

The learned Counsel for the Petitioner submitted that the draft charge sheet has been

prepared by the 18th Respondent who conducted the preliminary investigation, and not

by the Director (Administration). This position is correct. The learned Counsel for the

Petitioner has drawn the attention of this Court to the judgment of the Supreme Court

in University of Ruhuna and others vs Dr. Dharshana Wickremasinghe4 it was held that

in terms of the Universities Act, the duty to prepare the charge sheet is with the Council

of the University itself and that it would not suffice if the charge sheet is merely

approved by the Council.

However, in this instance, the failure on the part of the Director (Administration) to

prepare the charge sheet is not fatal, for two reasons. The first is that the preparation of

the charge sheet can also be done by a person nominated by the Director

(Administration), which therefore shows that it is not mandatory that the charge sheet

should be prepared by the Director (Administration). The second and the more

important reason is that while the requirement is that the charge sheet must be

approved by the Director General, in this instance, the charge sheet has been approved

not only by the Director General but by the Board of Trustees. I therefore do not see any

merit in the submission of the learned Counsel for the Petitioner.

In these circumstances, I am satisfied that there has been no illegality or procedural

impropriety in the process that culminated in the interdiction of the Petitioner and the

issuance of the charge sheet. Therefore, I do not see any legal basis to grant the

Petitioner the relief prayed for.

The necessary consequence of the above decision is that the disciplinary inquiry must

proceed against the Petitioner. However, such a course of action is not possible in view

4 SC Appeal No. 111/2020; SC minutes of 9th December 2016.

16

of the Petitioner having reached the age of retirement in 2019. To deprive the Petitioner

the retirement benefits that the Petitioner would be entitled to, in the absence of an

inquiry and a determination with regard to the charges, would not be fair. Hence, if

employees of the 1st Respondent are entitled to the payment of gratuity under and in

terms of the Payment of Gratuity Act No. 12 of 1983, I direct that the 1st Respondent

pay the Petitioner the gratuity that the Petitioner would be entitled to under the said

Act, calculated at the salary drawn by the Petitioner at the time of his interdiction, for

the period that the Petitioner served with the 1st Respondent until his interdiction.

Subject to the above, this application is dismissed, without costs.

President of the Court of Appeal