==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/ 149/25

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979.

Court of Appeal Case No: Kadiravel Mookaiya Puwanendraraja

CA/HCC/149/2025

High Court of Ratnapura ACCUSED-APPELLANT

HCR/ Ratnapura/105/2020

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Ershan Ariaratnam for the Appellant.

Tharaka Kodagoda for the Respondent.

CA/HCC/ 149/25

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 27/03/2026

DECIDED ON : 29/05/2026

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted for committing the murder of Marimuttu Thamil Selvi

on 30/05/2019 which is an offence punishable under Section 296 of the

Penal Code.

After a non-jury trial, the Learned High Court Judge has found the Appellant

guilty of the charge and sentenced him to death on 18/12/2024.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent to argue this matter in his absence. Also, at the time of

argument the Appellant was connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

On behalf of the Appellant, only one Ground of Appeal has been raised.

According to the Counsel for the Appellant, evidence led at the trial warrants

the consideration of the plea of cumulative provocation which had not been

adequately dealt with by the Learned High Court Judge in his judgment.

CA/HCC/ 149/25

3 | P a g e

Background of the Case

According to PW01 Subashini, a neighbour of the deceased, the deceased

and Appellant were husband and wife but had lived separately. There were

continuous quarrels between the parties due to various reasons. Even on the

previous day, both of them had fought. On the day of the incident, the

deceased had asked from her, but she could not give money to the deceased.

As such the deceased had gone to her place of stay. After some time, PW1

had witnessed the Appellant coming out of the deceased’s place with a bag

and had told her that he killed the deceased and requested her to go and see

her. When she went to the deceased’s house, she had found her body lying

fallen in the toilet with an axe on her head.

PW6, the JMO who held the post mortem examination had noted three

incised wounds on deceased’s head. According to the JMO the death of the

deceased had been caused due to head injury caused by both blunt and

sharp cutting tool.

The counsel for the Appellant takes up the position that the case against the

Appellant should have been considered under the plea of cumulative

provocation and should have been convicted not for murder but for culpable

homicide not amounting to murder under 297 of the Penal Code.

According to exception 1 of Section 294 of the Penal Code “Culpable Homicide

is not murder if the offender whilst deprived of the power of self-control by

grave and sudden provocation, causes the death of the person who gave the

provocation, or causes the death of any other person by mistake or accident”

The explanation under this exception read as that “Whether the provocation

was grave and sudden enough to prevent the offence from amounting to

murder is a question of fact”.

Although the counsel for the Appellant seeks relief for lesser culpability on

the plea of cumulative provocation, on perusal of the evidence led before the

High Court no evidence of sudden fight elicited either from the evidence of

CA/HCC/ 149/25

4 | P a g e

the prosecution nor was the same suggested in the cross examination.

According to Section 105 of the Evidence Ordinance it is the responsibility of

the Appellant to prove the existence of a general or special exception during

the trial on a balance of probability. In the absence, the Learned trial Judge

should direct his mind to the circumstances and the fact that the Appellant

is entitled to have the benefit of the lesser verdict.

In The King v Bellana Vithanage Eddin 41 NLR 345 the court held that:

"In a charge of murder, it is the duty of the judge to put to the jury the

alternative of finding the accused guilty of culpable homicide not

amounting to murder when there is any basis for such a finding in the

evidence on record, although such defence was not raised nor relied upon

by the accused”.

It is very important at this stage to discuss the development of law regarding

the acceptance of cumulative provocation as a special exception to a murder

charge in our jurisdiction.

In Premalal v Attorney General [2000] 2 SLR 403 Kulatilaka,J held that:

“Until the judgment of Chief Justice H.N.G Fernando in Samithamby v

Queen (1) (de Krester,J-dissenting) our court followed a strict view in

applying Exception (1) set out in Section 294 of the Penal Code. Our judges

following their counterparts in England interpreted the phrase “sudden

provocation” to mean that provocation should consist of a single act which

occurred immediately before killing so that there was no time for the anger

to cool and the act must have been such that it would have made a

reasonable man to react in the manner as the accused did. Our Courts

were reluctant to take into consideration any special circumstances which

manifested in the particular offender’s case”.

CA/HCC/ 149/25

5 | P a g e

Kulatilaka, J. further held that:

“Of late we observe a development in other jurisdictions where Courts and

juries have taken a more pragmatic view of the mitigatory plea of

provocation. In a series of cases in applying the mitigatory plea of

provocation Courts took into consideration the prior course of relationship

between the accused and his victim”.

In W.A. Gamini v Attorney General CA/142/2009 the court held that:

“the chain of stressful events in the troubled relationship of the accused

and the deceased culminating in the aforesaid unfortunate incident, are

probable reasonably sufficient to entertain a plea of continuing or

cumulative provocation because the accused retaliated at the spur of the

moment and that he could reasonably show that he was deprived of his

self-control”.

Citing the above two judgments His Lordship Jayantha Jayasuriya C.J. in

R.W.M.Nandana Senarathbandara v Attorney General

SC/Appeal/32/2015 decided on 17/07/2020 has held that:

“Jurisprudence referred to above demonstrate that in considering the plea

of grave and sudden provocation an accused is entitled to rely upon a

series of prior events that ultimately led to the incident at which the death

was caused. A court should not restrict its focus to an isolated incident

that resulted in the death, in considering a plea of grave and sudden

provocation. The aforementioned jurisprudence has widened the scope of

this plea by expanding the limitations recognized in its statutory form.

Thereby, the concept of “Continuing or Cumulative” provocation has been

recognized as a plea coming within the purview of the plea of grave and

sudden provocation recognized under Exception-1, section 294 of the Penal

Code. Therefore, the proximity of time between the “actus reus” of the

accused and the “provocative act” of the victim should be considered in the

context of the nature and circumstances in each case, in deciding whether

CA/HCC/ 149/25

6 | P a g e

an accused is entitled to the benefit of the plea of Grave and Sudden

Provocation”.

Further His Lordship in R.W.M.Nandana Senarathbandara v Attorney

General (Supra) has cited an Indian Judgment to explain how the concept

of ‘Sustained Provocation’ has been recognised and developed by the Indian

superior courts.

In Poovammal v State 2012 (2) MLJ (Crl.) 482 the court held:

“30. Under the English Criminal Law, the provocation must be grave and

also sudden. But, by way of judicial thinking, the Indian Criminal Law has

gone ahead. (K.M. NANAVATHI Vs STATE OF MAHARASTRA [A.I.R.) 1962

S.C. 605). In our system, there is the concept of “Sustained Provocation”. It

is concerned with the duration of the provocation. There may be

incidents/occurrences, which are such that they may not make the

offender suddenly to make his outburst by his overt act. However, it may

be lingering in his mind for quite some time, torment continuously and at

one point of time erupt, make him to lose his self-control, make his mind to

go astray, the mind may not be under his control/command and results in

the offender committing the offence. The sustained provocation/frustration

nurtured in the mind of the accused reached the end of breaking point,

under that accused causes the murder of the deceased.”

…………….

“34. In SUYAMBUKKANI Vs STATE OF TAMIL NADU [1989 LW (Crl.) 86], it

is held as under: - “Though there has been here and there attempts in those

decisions to bring the sustained provocation under Exception-1 to Section

300, I.P.C., there is a cardinal difference between provocation as defined

under Exception-1 and sustained provocation. The only word which is

common is ‘provocation’. What Exception-1 contemplates is a grave and

sudden provocation, whereas the ingredient of sustained provocation is a

series of acts more or less grave spread over a certain period of time, the

CA/HCC/ 149/25

7 | P a g e

last of which acting as the last straw breaking the camel’s back may even

be a very trifling one. We are, therefore, far from grave and sudden

provocation contemplated under Exception-1 to Section 300, I.P.C.

Sustained provocation is undoubtedly an addition by Courts, as

anticipated by the architects of the Indian Penal Code”.

Considering the above cited judgments and the background of this case, it

must now be considered whether this is an appropriate case to consider the

plea of cumulative provocation under Exception-1 to Section 294 of Penal

Code.

In this case, the deceased and the Appellant were husband and wife but lived

separately. According to PW1, even cooking was done separately as they

fought regularly and had even had a fight on the previous day before the

incident.

PW4, the daughter of the deceased and the Appellant admitted that the

Appellant once attempted to commit suicide but she was unaware of the

reason.

The first information was provided by the Appellant to the police.

Ashworth in 1975 Criminal LR 558-559 opines as follows:

“The significance of the deceased’s final act should be considered

by reference to the previous relations between the parties, taking

into account any previous incidents which add colour to the final

act” ……. The point is that the significance of the deceased’s final

act and its effect upon the accused-and indeed the relation of

the retaliation to that act-can be neither understood nor

evaluated without reference to previous dealings between the

parties”.

CA/HCC/ 149/25

8 | P a g e

In R.W.M.Nandana Senarathbandara v Attorney General (Supra) His

Lordship further held that:

“…. In these cases, the accused have gone through severe mental agony

or distress up to the point where the fatal attack takes place, due to such

series of events. Courts therefore had held that the accused should receive

the benefit of the plea of grave and sudden provocation, even though a time

gap exists between the act of provocation and the fatal attack. During the

time between these two points there had not been a “cooling off” of the

mind, but a state of continued metal stress and trauma due to the nature

and the gravity of the provocative conduct of the deceased did exist.

Therefore, for an accused to succeed in a plea of Grave and sudden

provocation on the basis of continuing or cumulative provocation, the court

on a balance of probability should be satisfied that the accused had gone

through a state of continued mental stress and agony during the gap

between the provocative conduct and the fatal attack”.

Analysing the evidence presented in this case, it clearly demonstrates that

the stressful events and the strained relationship of the Appellant and the

deceased had resulted in the unfortunate incident. As such, it is clear that

the Appellant had been subject to a state of continued mental stress as

required in this defence of cumulative provocation, depriving him of “cooling

off” of the mind. Although the Learned High Court Judge had briefly

discussed the concept of cumulative provocation, the benefit to the Appellant

under the said mitigatory plea had not been awarded.

The Learned State Counsel in keeping with the highest traditions of the

Attorney General’s Department conceded that this is an appropriate case to

consider under cumulative provocation under Exception-1 to Section 294 of

the Penal Code.

Considering all the circumstances stressed before this court, I conclude that

this is an appropriate case to consider for the Appellant’s benefit, his

CA/HCC/ 149/25

9 | P a g e

entitlement for a plea of cumulative provocation under Exception-1 to

Section 294 of the Penal Code.

Hence, we set aside the death sentence and convict the Appellant for culpable

homicide not amounting to murder under Section 297 of the Penal Code. We

sentence the Appellant for 15 years rigorous imprisonment commencing

from the date of conviction namely 18/12/2024.

Subject to the above variation, we dismiss the appeal.

The Registrar is directed to send this judgment to High Court of Ratnapura

along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL