~ I IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for

Revision in terms of Section 365

of the code of Criminal Procedure

Act No. 15 of 1979.

Hor:. AttorriE-] 'Jeneral

Attorney General's Department

Colombo 12.

CA/Revision Application No: Co~nplainant

CA (PHC) APN 152/2014 Vs.

No: 386/2006

1 T -1-) - d . -,-lngara _.,-.::._v.n ra

2. rvlanchanajlake Arachchilage

J arlaka Priyadarshana

3. Ramaiab J evaraj

AC~jlSed

And Now Between

"'N arnakL::.la_3uriya Paul Peter

Fernando,

55/8, Pallansena North,

Malayandaluwa, Kochchikade.

(currently serving the Sentence

in NegOlnbo Prison)

petitioner

Vs.

1

.,

Before : P.R.Walgama, J

01. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colomb() 12.

Complainant -Resnondent

1. Lingara Ravindra

2. 11 an chan ayake Arachchilage

Janaka Priyadarshana

3. Ran1.aiah J eyaraj

~,!;~~u_sed - Respondent

: L. T .B. Dehideniya, J

Counsel : Amila Palliyage for the Petiti'lD '.n .

Argued on

Decided on

: 25.05.2016

: 13.07.2016

CASE-NO- CA (PHC) APN 152 /2014- ORLE~ 13.07.2016

P.R.Walgama, J

1l-.:.e instant application of the Petitioncl stems from the

irnpugned 'Jrder of the Learned High Court Judge dated

31.10.2013, for confiscating the bail bond and for

sentencing the Petitioner for c.. perior'l. ~ twelve months.

2

The facts emerged from the above petition are as

follows;

The Petitioner stood as the surety for the 1 st Accused

who was charged for committing a murder of three

along with another two.

On 13tr of February 2007, the 1st 211d the 3rd Accused

YJere enlarged on bail.

On a pert:_.sal of the case record pertaining to this case

In the High Court Negombo, it IS apparent that the

1'>" Accused had been absconding ]r many occaSlOns,

and had been released on bail on producing the

sureties and satisfying other bail conditions thereto.

But nevertheless the Accused was in remand in respect

of another two offences which had been committed In

different jurisdictions.

In the said back drop the petitioner rr.'.~_de an application

CD the 27th of May 2009 for the re~ease him from the

case as a surety.

However the 1st Accused was enlargec: on bail on 16th

cr Novernber 2011, but on a strict bail conditions. In

the said conditions one was, to produce one surety

who is possessed of property worth of 10,000,000;' As

the Petitioner could not find a surety who possess a

p::.-operty, he stood as a surety aJ1d tendered his

property for the above purpo~e, the property which he

held with nis wife in commori, as co CV\/ners.

3

..

IL IS noted that the 1 st Accused <Absconded on 6th

Fe bruary 2014 and notice was issued to the sureties

to appear before court.

In pursuant to the afore said nO-::lce the Petitioner

a:'Jpeare d In court and had informed court that his

wife IS suffering from a terminal decease and he was

enlarged on bail.

On the 6 t:'l of August 2014 the Learned High Court

has confiscated the bail bond of the Petitioner, and

ordered a default sentence of twelve months.

Being aggrieved by the said order tt-,,= Petitioner came

by way of reV1SlOn to have the said order set aside

or vacate.

L is tc be noted tha;:: the counsel l/~l' the Respondent

1d C:~ not o~ject to the said application of the Petitioner.

'1'1 4 le section pertaining to th:: matter In Issue

~.:.. stated below ,

422(1)

" whenever it is proved to the satisfacl:~on of the court

by which a bond under this Code h.~s been taken, or

v/.aen th'~ bond IS for appc arance....,cfore a court, to

:.:: ,itisfac jon of such court that such bond has been

f',~)rfeited, the court shall record the grounds of such

proof and may call upon any such oerson bound by

4

such bond, to pay the penalty thereof or to show

cause why it should not be paid.

(:~~; If sufficient

r_)t paid the

by issuing a

movable or

person.

cause is not shown and the penalty IS

court may proceed to recover the same

warrant for the attachment and sale of

immovable property belonging to such

(3) .............................................. .

(,:q If such penalty be nc~ paid. and cannot be

:.:"f'covered by such attachment and the sale the person

so bound ~3hall be liable by G'..~der of court which issued

t:le warrant to simple imprisonment for a term which

may extend to six months.

Therefore it. IS abundantly clear that In default of the

payment of the bond the court could sentence the

surety only for SIX months simple imprisonment, that

1 q only after affording him an opportunity to show

cause as to why the bond should not be forfeited.

A schematic analysis of the circumstances that has

occurred in securing the presence of the 1 st accused it

IS obvious that without g1Vlng an opportunity to show

cause the Learned High Court Judge has forfeited the

bond and sentenced the petitioner to one year

iE:.prisonmen t.

5

Thus it is crystal clear that the said impugned order

of the Learned High Court Judge 1S blatantly erroneous

and should be set aside forthwith.

Besides it here by ordered that the High Court Judge

shall hold . . an 1nqu1ry 1n terms of Section 422 (1)

Registrar 18 here by directed to send a copy of this

order to the High Court of Negombo.

Application IS allowed accordingly.

L.T.B. Dehideniya, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

6