I !

I l I I I

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Case No. 599/1983 (F)

In the matter of an application for substitution under Section 337 of the Civil Procedure Code.

1. Selvanantham, son of J aganathan

2. Sivanantham, son of Jeganathan, presently in Dubai

3. Sakunthaladevi, daughter of J aganathan

D.C. Jaffna Case No. 5455/L (after marriage Mrs. Sakunthaladevi Tharumakulasingam)

4. Tharumakulasingam all of Neervely North, Neervely.

SUBSTITUTED DEFENDANT, PETITIONERS

(in place of the 2nd Deceased Defendant)

1. Sinnathamby Kasinathan

2. and wife, Nagammah

Both of Neervely North, Neervely.

PLAINTIFF, RESPONDENTS

1. Baladevi, widow of Rathasegaram,

2. Nalayaini, daughter of Rathasegaram,

(after marriage, Mrs. Nalayaini Vimalarajah)

3. Vimalarajah all of Neervely North, Neervely.

SUBSTITUTED DEFENDANT, RESPONDENTS

(in place of the 1st Deceased Defendant)

1

t

;'

i

\

i

{I! lIIIf f II

! !,

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Written Submissions on:

Decided on

A.H.M.D. NA WAZ, J.

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,j.

c.v. Vivekananthan with P.N. Joseph for the Su bstituted Defendant~ Petitioners.

Dr. Sunil Coorey for the Plaintiff~Respondent

18.06.2014; 16'07.2015 (For Substituted

Defendant~ Petitioners)

30.03.2016

'Thls case juxtaposes the inordinate delay and inertia displayed by the Substituted 1 Defendant~Petitioners (sometimes hereinafter referred to as "the Petitioners") in

this case in prosecuting this appeal to vindicate the rights of the original Defendants vis~

a~vis the rights of the Plaintiff~ Respondents (sometimes hereinafter referred to as "the

Respondents"). In fact the judgment in the case was pronounced in favor of the

Plaintiff~Respondents as far back as 1983. In a nutshell the concatenation of events in

the case goes as follows. As far back as 02.12.1983 the District Court of Jaffna delivered

its judgment in favour of the Plaintiff~Respondents who had come to court to vindicate

their pre~emption rights under the Thesawalamai. The original 1st and 2nd Defendants

preferred an appeal to the Court of Appeal in 1983. An order of abatement of the appeal

was made by this court on 02.01.1997 because the original Defendant~Appellants, in

terms of the proceedings dated 02.01.1997, had not complied with Rule 4 of the Supreme

Court Rules. The substituted Defendant~Petitioners representing the 2nd Deceased

Defendant made an application to this Court to re~list this appeal canvassing the order

of abatement in 2008~almost 13 years after the order of abatement was made in 1997. The

inquiry into the application for re~listing was not taken up on a number of occasions for

one reason or the other and when it ultimately came up for inquiry on 30.03.2011,

2

, i , \ IIrI ,

I f

neither the parties nor their representatives were present in court and in the attendant

circumstances this Court made the following order

''Parties absent and unrepresented No order."

Barely four years had lapsed since the making of this order when the Plaintiff/

Respondents filed a motion in this Court praying inter alia that the application for re/

listing of the appeal and vacation of the order of abatement must be dismissed. It is this

motion that has seemingly activated the substituted Defendants/Petitioners to file

objections to the motion and what has come up for inquiry before this Court is the

inquiry into this motion to have the application for re/listing dismissed.

The gravamen of argument of Dr. Sunil Coorey who appeared for the Plaintiff/

Respondents was that since this Court made the order on 30.03.2011 on which date the

court found none of the parties present in Court and until the Plaintiff/Respondents

filed their motion in 2014, the substituted Defendant/Petitioners lay dormant doing

nothing about their re/listing application and therefore a judgment in favor of the

Plaintiff/ Respondents that was rendered by the District Court of J affna in 1983 has

remained elusive and beyond the reach of the Plaintiff/Respondents for well/nigh 33

years and this displays a crass lack of due diligence on the part of the substituted

Defendant/ Petitioners.

On the contrary Mr. c.v. Vivekananthan for the substituted Defendant/Petitioners

launched his attack on the order of abatement itself made in 1997 and contended that

since that order was flawed for want of due process, all other steps taken since then

have become null and void.

I must straightaway make clear that the issue before this Court is whether the

application for re/listing the appeal should be disallowed for its non/prosecution and

not whether the order of abatement made in 1997 is a nullity.

If an order of abatement is a nullity, no doubt that order would be of no use or avail and

the appeal would in effect be pending. But the order of abatement must be shown to be

a nullity by the Petitioners. In order to argue the question of nullity, the Petitioners

3

,

\

\f

ff !

~' ,l

JI

\

must initially get over the threshold issue before Court-namely whether this re-listing

application can be taken up at all in the first place. The question of nullity of the order

of abatement, I must hold, could be argued only if this Court proceeds to hear the re-

listing application and in the course of an argument to restate the appeal, definitely the

question of nullity of abatement could be taken up. As I have said before, nullity is not

the issue before me. What is in issue before me now is whether the application for re-

listing could be taken up at all. Dr. Coorey for the Plaintiff-Respondents contends that

the application for re-listing must be dismissed for non prosecution thereof. The

question of investigation of the nullity alleged against the order of abatement would

arise only when the re-listing application is fully gone into. The argument of Dr. Coorey

was that this re-listing application itself should be dismissed because for 4 years till

2014 the substituted Defendant-Petitioners did nothing about their application for re-

listing having let it lie in abeyance and they took no steps whatsoever to revive the re-

listing application since it was filed.

Once again the chronology of events is quite pertinent in this matter. The District Court

of Jaffna delivered its judgment in 1983. An appeal was preferred to this Court in the

same year. This Court made the order of abatement of appeal in 1997. The record of the

case was sent back to the District Court of Jaffna. Only when the District Court of

Jaffna made its order to execute the decree on 23.05.2008, the application for re-listing

the abated appeal was made to this court on 26.05.2008.

Long delay to make an application to re-list

The substituted Defendant-Petitioners took 11 years from the order of abatement to

make an application to re-list the appeal. Even after it was filed, it is a salient feature in

this protracted litigation that the application for re-listing was not pursued with due

diligence. The application for re-listing was taken up for argument on several dates but

it has so happened that the inquiry had gone down on these dates for one reason or the

other-please see the journal entries dated 4/3/2009, 9/12/2009, 15/2/2010, 11/06/2010,

10/9/2010 and 30/03/2011.

4 \,,

~ j,

r.

No order on the date of the inquiry into the application for re~ listing

So when the inquiry into the application for re-listing came up again on 30.03.0ll, no

order was made as both parties had been absent and unrepresented.

Three years later, on the 13.02.2014, the Plaintiff-Respondents filed a motion praying for

a dismissal of the case as no appropriate steps had been taken by the substituted

Defendant-Petitioners even to prosecute the application for re-listing. The substituted

Defendant-Petitioners filed their objections to this motion and it is the inquiry into this

motion that was argued before this Court. As the above concatenation of events shows,

there has been inertia and lethargy in prosecuting this appeal and more particularly the

application for re-listing. If a Petitioner seeks a re-listing of an abated appeal, it is the

bounden duty to show utmost diligence and promptitude in prosecuting the re-listing

application. The mere filing of a re-listing application would not suffice for this purpose.

Constant vigilance has to be shown as to the seriousness of restoring the appeal. The

Petitioners by a long lapse of time in prosecuting the re-listing application cannot

render a judgment secured in the original court elusive and beyond the reach of

successful litigants such as the Plaintiff-Respondents in this case.

If a Petitioner for a re-listing application absents himself from the inquiry for reasons

beyond his control, a reasonable cause for absence must be brought home to Court.

Merely because the Respondent to the re-listing application is also absent that is no

ground for absolution for the Petitioner. Because it is the petitioner's application for re-

listing that is before Court, it is incumbent upon him to move Court to expeditiously

have the appeal restored. But the substituted Defendant-Petitioners in this case have

not displayed any of the aspects of due diligence as is required of them. When no order

was made by this Court on 30.03.20ll on which day the application for re-listing came

up for inquiry, the Petitioners should have moved with speed and dispatch to explain

the delay by way of a motion and taken steps to restore the inquiry. For three years

running the substituted Defendant-Petitioners stood as mute bystanders. It is quite

natural in the circumstances for the Respondents (the Plaintiff-Respondents who had

succeeded in the original court) to file a motion to move for a dismissal of the 5

application for re~listing. It was in these circumstances that the motion dated 13.02.2014

filed by the Plaintiff~Respondents has to be understood. There must be a finis to

litigation and that has remained the age~old and well~established policy of law~Ut sit finis

litium.

It is the motion of the Plaintiff~Respondents that seems to have awoken the Petitioners

for re~listing. In their objections to the motion filed by the Petitioners, I find no

explanation as to why the Petitioners did not revive their application for re~listing so

soon after no order was made. Such conduct of want of due diligence is so glaring that

one wonders whether the Petitioners would deserve any kind of relief in these

circumstances. On the facts and circumstances of this case, the decision of the Supreme

Court inJabir v. Karunawathie (200S) 3 Sri.LR 412 becomes quite pertinent. In that

case the Defendant~Appellant had died on 30.01.2000 pending his appeal. As no

application for substitution was made for two years by any interested party in order to

proceed with the appeal, the Court of Appeal issued notice on the registered attorney~

at~law of the deceased Defendant~Appellant. On being satisfied that the notice had been

served, and as no application for substitution was made even thereafter, the Court of

Appeal made the order of abatement. Accordingly the Court of Appeal sent back the

record to the District Court. An application made thereafter by the spouse of the

deceased Defendant~ Appellant to get the order of abatement set aside and to have

herself substituted in the room of the deceased Defendant~Appellant was allowed by the

Court of Appeal. The Plaintiff~ Respondent appeal against the order of the Court of

Appeal to the Supreme Court. In appeal the Supreme Court set aside the said order and

dismissed the application of the spouse to set aside the order of abatement and for

su bstitution.

In the instant case before me, the order of abatement was made a decade ago. The

demerits of the application to set aside this order by way of the instant re~listing

application far outweigh the merits and the want of due diligence tainting the non

prosecution of the application to re~list is inexcusable given that there has been no

explanation for the long inertia displayed by the Petitioners. The Plaintiff~Respondents

6

can no longer be kept away from a judgment rendered in their favor 19 years ago by a

stratagem adopted by the Petitioners to first file a belated re-listing application and not

prosecute it later.

In the circumstances I proceed to dismiss the application of the substituted Defendant-

Petitioners with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

7

; r

1I! ! t ! t i I t i