==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0121/25

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: Raju Vishvendran

CA/HCC/0121/2025

High Court of Colombo

Case No: HC/4716/2024

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

Complainant-Respondent

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Lelani Sirisena for the Appellant.

Janaka Bandara, DSG for the Respondent.

CA/HCC/0121/25

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 19/06/2026

DECIDED ON : 22/07/2026

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted by the Attorney General in the High Court of

Colombo under Sections 54(A) (d) and 54(A) (b) of the Poisons, Opium and

Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended by Act No. 13 of 1984 for

Possession and Trafficking of 6.50 grams of Heroin (Diacetylmorphine) on

20.06.2021.

The prosecution had called 02 witnesses in support of their case and marked

productions P1 to P9 and closed the case. When the defence was called, the

Appellant had made a dock statement and closed his case.

After the consideration of the evidence presented by the prosecution and the

defence, the Learned Trial Judge found the Appellant guilty on both counts

and he was sentenced to life imprisonment on both counts on 03/12/2024.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

CA/HCC/0121/25

3 | P a g e

The Counsel for the Appellant informed this Court that the Appellant had

given his consent to argue this matter in his absence. Hence, argument was

taken up in his absence. However, the Appellant was connected via the Zoom

platform from prison.

On behalf of the Appellant the following Grounds of Appeal have been

raised:

1. The Learned High Court Judge failed to consider all material

contradictions and improbabilities in the evidence of prosecution

witnesses.

2. The Learned High Court Judge has erred in law and in fact by failing to

evaluate the serious inconsistencies and omissions in the prosecution

evidence relating to the alleged prior information and the identification

of the accused at the time of the arrest.

3. The Learned Hight Court Judge failed to consider the improbabilities of

the story of the prosecution – Failure to Prove Time, Urgency, and

Proper Action on Alleged Information.

4. The Learned High Court Judge has erred in law and in fact in holding

that the prosecution had proved the chain of custody of the alleged

productions beyond reasonable doubt.

5. The Learned High Court Judge has erred in law and in fact in holding

that the prosecution had proved possession of the alleged contraband

beyond reasonable doubt.

6. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to consider material

contradictions on a Crucial Fact; Material Contradiction Regarding

Electricity.

7. The Learned High Court Judge erred in law and in fact in convicting

the accused-appellant for the offence of trafficking in Heroin, in

circumstances where the prosecution failed to prove the essential

elements of the said offence beyond reasonable doubt.

CA/HCC/0121/25

4 | P a g e

8. The Learned High Court Judge has erred in law and in fact by failing to

evaluate and give due consideration to material evidence elicited

during the trial which supports the defence version.

9. The Learned High Court Judge erred in law in convicting the Accused

by placing reliance on alleged weaknesses of deficiencies in the

Defence, rather than strictly assessing whether the Prosecution had

proved its case beyond reasonable doubt.

Background of the case.

On 20.06.2021, SI/Amarasekera attached to the Mattakkuliya Police Station

received an information from his private informant via WhatsApp that a

person named Raju alias Thambi was in possession of drugs and his

residence was mentioned as No. D/39, Samithpura, Mattakkuliya. Acting on

that information he had gone to the location with PW2 PC 68603 Jayathilake

of the Mattakkukiya Police Station. When they reached the address given,

they had seen the Appellant there with a bag in his possession and the

Appellant had run into the house after seeing them. PW1 and PW2 had then

apprehended the Appellant with the parcel. He was taken to the

Mattakkuliya Police Station and the substances believed to be Heroin which

were recovered from the Appellant were weighed. The gross weight of the

substances was recorded as 71.963 grams.

The production was sent to the Government Analyst Department and the net

quantity of Heroin (Diacetylmorphine) was recorded as 6.50 grams.

PW2 had given evidence and corroborated the evidence of PW1.

The Appellant in his dock statement admitted that drugs were found in his

house but the Appellant denied that anything was recovered from him. He

had said that the inmates of the house were arrested and some are tried for

possession of drugs. His brother who was arrested had later been

discharged.

CA/HCC/0121/25

5 | P a g e

In every criminal case the burden is on the prosecution to prove the case

beyond a reasonable doubt against the accused person, and this burden

never shifts. Hence an accused person has no burden to prove his case

unless he pleads a general or a special exception in the Penal Code.

In the case of Mohamed Nimnaz V. Attorney General CA/95/94 held:

“A criminal case has to be proved beyond reasonable doubt. Although

we take serious view in regard to offences in relation to drugs, we are

of the view that the prosecutor should not be given a second chance to

fill the gaps of badly handled prosecutions….”

In the case of Attorney-General v. Rawther 25 NLR 385, Ennis, J. states thus: [1987} 1 SLR 155

"The evidence must establish the guilt of the accused, not his innocence. His innocence is presumed in law, from the start of the case, and his guilt must be established beyond a reasonable

doubt”.

In Miller v. Minister of Pensions (1947) 2 All E.R. 372 the court held that:

“the evidence must reach the same degree of cogency as is required in

a criminal case before an accused person is found guilty. That degree is

well settled. It need not reach certainty, but it must carry high degree of

probability. Proof beyond reasonable doubt does not mean proof beyond

the shadow of a doubt. The law would fail to protect the community if it

admitted fanciful possibilities to deflect the course of justice. If the

evidence is so strong against a man as to leave only a remote possibility

in his favour which can be dismissed with the sentence, “of course it is

possible, but not in the least probable,” the case is proved beyond

reasonable doubt, but nothing short of that will suffice”.

CA/HCC/0121/25

6 | P a g e

In the case of Sivathasan v. Attorney General [2021] 2 SLR 290 it was held:

“A reasonable doubt is a real or actual and a substantial doubt, as

opposed to an imaginary or flimsy doubt that may arise in the mind of the

decider of facts (judge or the jury, as the case may be), following an

objective consideration of all the attendant facts and circumstances.

A reasonable doubt is not the type of doubt that arises due to incorrect,

abnormal or unreasonable comprehension of testimonies and other

material which amount to evidence presented at the trial, or due to

irrational fear, inappropriate sympathy, or unjustifiable mercy.”

As the grounds of appeal are inter-connected, I decided to consider those

grounds jointly hereinafter. At the hearing, the Learned Counsel for the

Appellant contended that the Learned Trial Judge failed to consider that the

prosecution version did not pass the test of probability and erred in both

facts and law when concluding that the prosecution proved the case beyond

a reasonable doubt.

In this case, PW1 had vividly given evidence as to how the raid was conducted

after receiving information while on duty. Acting on that information, he had

successfully arrested the Appellant who was a total stranger to him.

Firstly, the Learned Counsel for the Appellant contended that the distance

between the Mattakkuliya Police Station and the Appellant’s house has been

contradicted by PW1 and PW2. According to PW1, the house is situated 350

meters away from the police. PW2 had said it is 300 meters away from the

police. This cannot be considered a material contradiction as contended by

the Counsel for the Appellant.

Next, the Learned Counsel contended that contradictory evidence had been

given by PW1 and PW2 in respect of the time of arrest.

CA/HCC/0121/25

7 | P a g e

PW1 in his evidence in chief said that the Appellant was arrested at 18.50

hours. In the cross examination he had said it was 19.50 hours. In the re-

examination he had said that the arresting time was 19.15 hours.

PW2 in his evidence said that the Appellant was arrested at 19.15 hours at

his residence.

The Learned Counsel contended that the contradictory arresting time

suggested that the Appellant was not arrested as claimed by the prosecution.

Although PW2 had contradicted the time of arrest in his examination in chief

and cross examination, in the re-examination, he had tallied with the

evidence given by PW2. Therefore, this has no bearing on the prosecution’s

case.

The Learned Counsel highlighted that PW1 and PW2 had contradicted the

colour of the shirt worn by the Appellant at the time of his arrest. According

to PW1 the Appellant had been wearing a yellow coloured long sleeved T-

Shirt but according to PW2 it was a black coloured long-sleeved T-Shirt.

Therefore, she contends that the evidence given by PW1 and PW2 differ on

this material point. This contradiction has no effect on the root of the case,

as both the witnesses had said that the Appellant was wearing a long-sleeved

T-Shirt at the time of his arrest.

In this case, the Appellant in his dock statement admitted that he was

arrested at his residence by the police. Further, he admitted that drugs had

been recovered in a bag kept in his house. He denied that drugs had been

recovered from his possession. The dock statement of the Appellant is re-

produced in verbatim below:

Pages 116-117 of the brief.

මම ගෙදර හිටිගේ නිදියගෙන නැගිටලා ඇඟපත එගෙම ගෙෝදගෙන ඉන්නග ාට තමයි ගපාලීසිගයන් ගෙදරට ආගේ.ඇවිල්ලා ගෙවල් ග ෝදිසි ලා. ෙන්න බඩු ටි කියලා ඉවර ගවලා මම කිේවා මම දන්ගන් නැෙැ කියලා. ඊලඟට අපිට ඔකග ාම ෙැහුවා. ෙෙලා ග ෝදිසි රලා ාමගේට ගිහිල්ලා බෑග් එ ක තිබුනා. ඒ බෑග් එගක තිබුණු බඩු ෙත්තා. මගග් අගත්

CA/HCC/0121/25

8 | P a g e

තිබුගන් නැෙැ. මගග් අක ගග් පුතාටත් ෙෙලා, මගග් යාලුවටත් ෙෙලා, අයියටත් ෙෙලා, ඔකග ාමලාම එක ගෙන ගියා ගපාලීසියට. ෙෙලා එයාලා මට ෙයිග ෝට් දැම්මා. පුතාටයි මගග් යාලුවටයි ෑල්ල ෑල්ල පැ ට්, නඩු ගද ක දැම්මා. අයියව දව ක තියාගෙන ඉඳලා පහුගවනිදා උදේ එයාව නිදෙ ් රලා යැේවා. ෙැහුවා ගොඳටම. මගග් න්ත ගේ නම් බඩු තිබුගන් නැෙැ. ගෙදර තමයි තිබුගන්. මට කීමට ඇත්ගත් එපමණයී.

In this case PW1 and PW4 are key witnesses. Their evidence is clear, cogent

and unambiguous. The Appellant had admitted that he was arrested by the

police at his residence and that they had recovered drugs from his house.

The court considering all the evidence presented by the prosecution, without

any hesitation relied on that evidence and convicted the Appellant. Further,

their evidence has passed the probability test.

As the prosecution had proven this case beyond reasonable doubt, I affirm

the conviction and the sentence imposed by the Learned High Court Judge

of Colombo dated 03/12/2024 on the Appellant. Therefore, his appeal is

dismissed.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Colombo along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL