Page 1 of 7

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Court of Appeal Case No: CA (PHC)

APN 149 / 2019

High Court of Negombo Case No: HC

664 / 2013

Magistrates Court of Wattala Case

No: B 234 / 2013

An application for revision under

Article 138 (1) of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka.

Officer in Charge,

Police Narcotic Bureau,

Colombo 01.

Complainant

Vs.

Razik Ramzeen

(Presently incarcerated in remand

prison)

Suspect

AND BETWEEN

Razik Ramzeen

(Presently incarcerated in remand

prison)

Accused Petitioner

Vs.

1. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Page 2 of 7

Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

Razik Ramzeen

(Presently incarcerated in remand

prison)

Accused Petitioner Petitioner

Vs.

1. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent Respondent

Before: Menaka Wijesundera J.

Neil Iddawala J.

Counsel: Nalin Weerakoon for the Accused Petitioner.

P. Abeygunawardena, SC for the Respondent.

Argued on: 03.03.2022

Decided on: 24.03.2022

Page 3 of 7

MENAKA WIJESUNDERA J.

The instant application for revision has been filed to set aside the order of the

learned High Court Judge of Negambo refusing to enlarge the accused petitioner

(hereinafter referred to as the petitioner) namely RazikRamzzeen on bail.

The petitioner was taken in to custody for being in possession of heroin on

9.2.2013 and was indicted for the same on 18.11.2013.

The grievance of the petitioner is that he has been in remanding ever since, for

nearly 10 years up to date.

The petitioner had been indicted under the provisions of the Poisons Opium and

Dangerous drugs amendment act no 13 of 1984 under which if an accused or

suspect is produced or charged under section 54 A and B the suspect or accused

can be enlarged on bail only upon exceptional circumstances by the High Court.

The term exceptional has not been defined in the act, but in many of our decided

cases many grounds have been considered to be exceptional, such as,

1) The nature of the accusation,

2) The culpability of the accused,

3) The severity of the sentence if convicted,

4) The health condition of the petitioner which would be aggravated by the

incineration.

Page 4 of 7

Therefore what has been decided so far is that the exceptionality would be decided

by the facts of each case. This has been discussed in the case of Carder vs. OIC

Narcotics Bureau 2006 3 SLR 74 by Basnayake J.

In the instant matter the main grievance of the petitioner is that he has been in

remand for 10 years without the trial being concluded.

If one may go through the proceedings against the petitioner in the relevant High

Court it is noted that,

1) Indictment has been received by the High Court on 2013.11.18,

2) It had been served on the petitioner on 2014.6.4, and trial had been fixed,

3) But since then 15 trial dates had gone and only prosecution witness no1 had

been partly concluded up to date.

Numerous bail applications have been made but on each occasion the trial judge

had refused bail on the basis that the trial had been postponed owing to the huge

backlog of cases pending in the Court.

But in the case of CH/PHC/APN/36/2016 it has been held by Sisira De Abrew J

that in a case of similar nature that it is therefore seen that the learned High

Court judge has post poned the case by a period of 1 year and 4 months,..If the

accused is on remand it becomes the duty of the trial judge to expedite and

conclude the matter without delay .this itself can be considered as an

exceptional ground to release the accused on bail.

Therefore in the instant matter the trial had been postponed on 15 trial dates

with only on one single day the trial being taken up, which in the opinion of this

Page 5 of 7

Court should be strongly discouraged because it undermines the due

administration of justice.

It has been decided in the case of Sumanadasa vs. Attorney General (SLR

2006202) by the former CJ Sarath Silva that ...fundamental rights of the

petitioners guaranteed by the Article 13(2) have been infringed being detained

in custody merely upon being produced in Court and incaserated without a

remedy until the conclusion of their trials

According to Chapter 111 Article 13 (4) of the constitution it says that no person

shall be punished with death or imprisonment except by order of a competent

court, made in accordance with procedure established by law. The arrest holding

in custody, detention or other deprivation of personal liberty of a person, pending

investigation or trial shall not constitute punishment.

The Counsel appearing for the respondents strenuously urged that the trial had

been postponed for the huge backlog of cases which are pending in the High

Court of the instant matter, and further said that fair trial has to be ensured to

the accused and to the prosecution as well.

The Constitution by Article 13(3) has expressly provided a person accused of an

offence to be heard by an Attorney-At-Law at a fair trial by a competent court. In

the case of The AG v Segulebbe Latheef and another(S.C. Appeal No. 79A/2007,

24/2008 and 25/2008, the concept of fair trial has been analyzed, and J.A.N de

Silva, J has said that,The right of an accused person to a fair trial is recognized in

all the criminal justice system in the civilized world, its denial is generally proof

enough that justice is denied. Like the concept of fairness, a fair trial is also not

capable of a clear definition. The right to a fair trial has been defined by way of

Page 6 of 7

thirteen chachteristicsbytheir lordships and have included the The right of an

accused to be tried without much delay also as one of them.

Therefore, the right of an accused person to a fair trial without delay has been

recognized in the criminal justice systems in the civilized world as being of utmost

importance. The concept of fair trial was formerly recognized in International law

in 1948 in the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights. Since 1948, the right

to a fair trial has been incorporated into many national, international and

regional instruments. Therefore, a trial being concluded without a delay is of

utmost importance in the concept of a fair trial which the counsel for the

respondents failed to mention.

It is also noted with regret that if the Court is overloaded with work it is more the

reason to consider bail for the accused because conclusion of the trial seems to be

very remote and not in the near future, and it is very clearly stipulated in the

constitution under article 13(4).holding in custody detention or other

deprivation of personal liberty of a person pending investigation or trial shall not

constitute punishment.

Therefore as stated by his Lordship Sisira de Abrew in the case cited above it is

the duty of the trial judge to give precedence to the cases where the accused is in

remand over the other cases. Therefore it is needless to say that it is the duty of

the persecution too to be amicus to Court to conclude those matters speedily

ensuring the rights of the accused as enshrined in the constitution.

It has been held in the case of Attorney General vs. Ediriweera 2006 (BLR)12 that

delay is always a relative term and the question to be considered is not whether

there was mere explicable delay ,as when there was a back log of cases , but

whether there has been excessive or oppressive delay ...

Page 7 of 7

Therefore in the instant matter the case against the petitioner has gone down on

numerous occasions from 2014 to up to date without conclusion, which runs in to

a span of nearly 10 years during which period the petitioner had been in remand

which this Court considers to be a delay which is oppressive and exceptional.

Hence the instant application for revision is allowed and the order of the High

Court refusing bail is set aside and this Court directs the High Court Judge to

impose suitable conditions of bail and enlarge the petitioner on bail.

As such the instant application for revision is allowed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.

I agree.

Neil Iddawala J.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.