IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA CASE NOS: CALA/507/2006

CALA/512/2006

CA/REV/1639/2002

DC PANADURA CASE NO: 457/P

19. Haburugama Arachchige

Seelawathie,

No. 305/3,

Janatha Mawatha,

Werahera,

Boralesgamuwa.

21. Manimeldura Kapila De Zoysa,

No. 305/9,

Janatha Mawatha,

Werahera,

Boralesgamuwa.

Defendant-Petitioners

in CALA/507/2006

18. Lankapura Premalatha,

No. 303,

Werahera,

Boralesgamuwa.

24. Jacob John,

(deceased)

No. 305/4,

2

Janatha Mawatha,

Werahera,

Boralesgamuwa.

24A. Wickramasinghe Arachchige Lalitha,

No. 305/4,

Janatha Mawatha,

Werahera,

Boralesgamuwa.

28. Charlotte Lankapura,

(deceased)

Chandra Stores,

No. 156,

Karagampitiya,

Dehiwala.

28A. Lankapura Premalatha,

No. 303,

Werahera,

Boralesgamuwa.

Defendant-Petitioners

in CALA/512/2006

Kalaha Arachchige Dona Anne

Kamel Perera,

C1, Maddumage Watta,

Nugegoda.

Petitioner

in CA/REV/1639/2002

Vs.

3

K.A. Piyaratne,

No. 234,

Werahera Junction,

Boralesgamuwa.

Plaintiff-Respondent

And Several Other Defendant-

Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Dr. Jayatissa de Costa, P.C., with Chanuka

Ekanayake for the 19th and 21st Defendant-Petitioners

in CALA/507/2006.

Nihal Jayamanna, P.C., with Mokshini Jayamanna for

the 18th, 24A, 28A Defendant-Respondents in

CALA/512/2006.

W. Dayaratne, P.C., with R. Jayawardena for the

Petitioner in CA/REV/1639/2002.

Decided on: 08.02.2019

Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff filed this action in the District Court of Panadura

naming 17 defendants seeking to partition the land described in

the schedule to the plaint among the plaintiff and the said 17

defendants. At the preliminary survey, a number of parties have

presented themselves before the court commissioner as claimants.

4

After the preliminary survey, the defendants have shot up to 34. It

is significant to note that, according to the Preliminary Plan and

the Report, out of the 1st-17th defendants and the plaintiff, only the

17th defendant is living on the land, and all the others living on the

land having permanent buildings with definite boundaries are

claimants.

Section 5 of the Partition Law, No. 21 of 1977, as amended, so far

as relevant for the present purposes reads as follows:

5. The plaintiff in a partition action shall include in his plaint

as parties to the action all persons who, whether in actual

possession or not, to his knowledge are entitled or claim to be

entitled

(a) to any right, share or interest to, of, or in the land to which

the action relates, whether vested or contingent, (and whether

by way of mortgage, lease, usufruct, servitude, trust, life

interest, or otherwise) or

(b) to any improvements made or effected on or to the land

According this section, a person does not need to have a prima

facie right or interest in the land to make him a party. Broadly

speaking, every person who claims to be entitled to have some

interest in the land (not necessarily of soil rights) shall be made a

party. Forgetting everything else, even by having a cursory look at

the Preliminary Plan and the Report, one would wonder the

audacity of the plaintiff to refuse to make in the plaint a number of

people who are living on the land as parties to the case in blatant

violation of the above section.

In Jane Nona v. Dingirimahatmaya (1968) 74 NLR 105 it was held:

5

It is the duty of a plaintiff in a partition action to set out to the

best of his knowledge and ability a full and comprehensive

pedigree showing the devolution of title with reference to all

the deeds of sale on which title is alleged to have passed. In

view of the very far reaching consequences of a decree under

the Partition Act, a Court should not assist a plaintiff who

either through carelessness or indifference does not place

before the Court evidence which should be available to him.

Be that as it may, several parties who were later added as

defendants filed their statements of claim based on Deeds, Plans

etc. to contest the plaintiffs case. They basically sought exclusion

of separate Lots depicted in the Preliminary Plan.

When matters remained as such, on the date of the trial, i.e.

20.03.2001, miraculously, all the contesting defendants were

absent and the registered Attorney for most of the contesting

defendants who was present in Court stated to Court that he had

no instructions!

As seen from the proceedings dated 20.03.2001, on the date of the

trial, out of 34 defendants and the plaintiff, only the plaintiff and

the 9th and 34th defendants had been present; and only the

plaintiff, the 1st, 17th and 34th defendants have been represented

by two Attorneysone for the plaintiff and the other for the other

three defendants.

Then three admissions have been recorded.

The 1st admission is that the parties agree that the land depicted in

the Preliminary Plan is the land to be partitioned. This in my view

6

is a misleading admission because it shall be qualified to read as

the plaintiff, the 1st, 17th and 34th defendants (not all) agree that

the land depicted in the Preliminary Plan is the land to be

partitioned.

The 2nd admission, if I understand correctly, is that the

improvements and plantation shall go according to the Report to

the Preliminary Plan (and that is the evidence of the plaintiff as

well).

The 3rd admission, if I understand correctly, is that improvements

marked A, B, C in Lot 1 of the Preliminary Plan (i.e. foundation,

house and well), shall go to the 1st and 3rd defendants.

In the first place, once the 2nd admission (to say that improvements

shall go according to the Report of the Preliminary Plan) is

recorded, it is redundant to have the 3rd admission.

However, it appears to me that the 2nd and 3rd admissions are

contradictory because it is the 17th defendant (not the 1st and 3rd

defendants) who has claimed the improvements marked A, B, C in

Lot 1 before the court commissioner.

After recording admissions, the plaintiffs evidence has been led

without any contest, and trial has been concluded. Not a single

question has been asked from the plaintiff either by a defendant or

by Court. Thereafter the Judgment has been pronounced on

03.05.2001.

The first paragraph of the Judgment is revealing. It, translated

into English, reads as follows:

7

This case is regarding partition of a land. Notwithstanding

there was a contest among the parties, at the date of the trial,

the contesting parties were not before Court, and the parties

who were before Court had arrived at a settlement.

Then it is clear that the learned District Judge knew when the

plaintiffs evidence was led: (a) the contesting parties were not

before Court for some reason; (b) the registered Attorney for some

of the contesting parties in spite of being present says he has no

instructions; and (c) the plaintiff and the three defendants present

in Court have settled the matter.

In that backdrop, can a District Judge trying a partition case

maintain pin drop silence at the trial and enter a partition decree

as prayed for in the plaint without asking a single question from

the plaintiff about the contest raised by the contesting defendants

in their statements of claim? He cannot. Regrettably, that is what

has been done in this case.

I must pause for a while to say that inasmuch as justice delayed is

justice denied, justice hurried is justice buried. Justice must be

speedy, but not hasty.

Judges shall, especially in partition cases, without unnecessarily

encroaching upon the arena preserved for pleaders, actively engage

in the trial without being mere passive observers.

If the learned District Judge in the instant action had merely

glanced at least at the Preliminary Plan whilst the evidence of the

plaintiff was being led, he would have, with great respect,

8

immediately realized that Hamlet was being performed without the

Prince of Denmark!

If I may make a general observation, there are some lawyers who

are anxiously waiting to grab the opportunity to have a hassle-free

ex parte judgment. Their clients are elated to see that they got the

judgment without undue delay. But that happiness in my

experience is short-lived, and more often than not

counterproductive when the defaulting party makes an application

to have the ex parte judgment vacated. That is what has happened

in this case as well. With respect, if the Attorney for the plaintiff

was more patient and the Attorney on record for the contesting

parties was more responsible, by this time, the litigation must have

come to a finality.

Even though this is not the occasion to pen down of the

responsibilities of the registered Attorneys, I cannot resist

mentioning a few words on that matter. A registered Attorney

cannot appear in Court on the trial date only to inform the Court

that he has no instructions. He cannot refuse to appear merely

because his professional fees for that day have not been paid. If he

has no instructions, he should have, as a responsible registered

Attorney, known it beforehand and revoked the proxy. Whether on

the trial date or otherwise, when there is a proxy on record, the

party need not be physically present in Court unless his presence

is necessary such as to give evidence. Even if he is present in

Court, he has no right of audience unless through his Attorney.

He must tell whatever he has to tell through his Attorneyvide the

Judgment of Justice Amarasinghe in the Supreme Court case of

Fernando v. Sybil Fernando [1997] 3 Sri LR 1.

9

In Daniel v. Chandradeva [1994] 2 Sri LR 1 at 8-9 on behalf of the

Supreme Court Justice Amarasinghe observed:

The relationship of attorney and client is much more than an

ordinary contractual relationship. It does not terminate

automatically upon the non-payment of fees. Nor can it be

abruptly terminated. An attorney is ordinarily justified in

withdrawing if the client fails or refuses to pay or secure the

proper fees or expenses of the attorney after being reasonably

requested to do so, provided his right of withdrawal is not

exercised at a moment at which the client may be unable to find

other legal assistance in time to prevent damage being done. An

Attorney is obliged to protect his client's interests as far as

possible and should not desert the client at a critical stage of a

matter when the withdrawal would put the client in a position of

disadvantage or peril. An attorney should not summarily

withdraw from a case or matter he has undertaken. He must not

suddenly decide to cease to act for the client and jettison him.

The attorney must give his client reasonable warning that he will

withdraw unless the client fulfils his obligations. The respondent

gave no warning of her inability to continue as the Registered

Attorney on account of the client's failure to pay her fees. If she

was unwilling to continue the professional account of the failure

of the complainant to pay her fees, she should have taken steps

to have her proxy revoked after warning the client and giving him

a reasonable time to appoint another Registered Attorney.

Section 27(2) of the Civil Procedure Code enacts that when a proxy

is filed, it shall be in force until revoked with the leave of the Court

and after notice to the registered Attorney by a writing signed by

10

the client and filed in Court, or until the client dies, or until the

registered Attorney dies, is removed, or suspended, or otherwise

becomes incapable to act, or until all proceedings in the action are

ended and judgment satisfied so far as regards the client.

Section 28 of the Civil Procedure Code says that if the registered

Attorney shall die, or be removed or suspended, or otherwise

become incapable to act as aforesaid, at any time before judgment,

no further proceeding shall be taken in the action against the party

for whom he appeared until thirty days after notice to appoint

another registered Attorney has been given to that party.

Coming back to the substantive matter under consideration, the

learned District Judge in the Judgment has as a matter of routine

summarized the evidence of the plaintiff in one page and then

ordered the land to be partitioned as set out in the plaint among

the plaintiff and the 1st-17th defendants without mentioning a word

about the cases of the contesting defendants. The learned Judge

has also stated that improvements marked A, B, C in Lot 1 shall go

to the 1st and 3rd defendants, and the rest according to the Report

of the Preliminary Plan.

That means, all the buildings including dwelling houses claimed

before the court commissioner and shown in the Preliminary Plan

shall go to those parties who were absent at the trial date, but they

are not entitled to a grain of sand from the land!

After entering the Interlocutory Decree in terms of the Judgement,

a commission has been issued to prepare the final scheme of

partition. Then the commissioner has written to the learned

District Judge by letter dated 07.06.2002 seeking further

11

instructions to prepare the final scheme of partition as the 17th-

22nd, 24th, 27th, 28th-33rd defendants who have Deeds but not got

any soil rights from the Judgment are living on the land. He has

further stated that notwithstanding notices were sent, 1st-16th

defendants did not participate at the final survey. It may be

recalled that out of the 1st-17th defendants and the plaintiff, only

the 17th defendant is living on the land, and all others living on the

land are contesting defendants who were absent at the trial date.

The court commissioner has not carried out the commission

obviously because it is not practically possible.

Thereafter several defendants including the 18th, 19th, 21st, 24th,

28th and also some third parties have filed applications under

section 48(4) of the Partition Law, No. 21 of 1977, as amended,

seeking special leave to establish their title to the land. This has

been rejected by the learned District Judge by order dated

06.12.2006. It is against this order the 19th and 21st defendants

filed Leave to Appeal Application CALA/507/2006; and the 18th,

24th and 28th defendants CALA/512/2006. In addition, one

Kalaha Arachchige Dona Anne Kamel Perera has also filed a

Revision Application CA/REV/1639/2002 seeking to set aside the

Judgment. Learned Presidents Counsel appearing for the

petitioners in those three matters and the learned counsel

appearing for the respondents agreed to amalgamate all three

cases and abide by a single Judgment as all three applications

stem out of the same Judgment of the District Court.

It was the submission of the learned Presidents Counsel for the

petitioners in CALA/507/2006 and CALA/512/2006 that

notwithstanding this matter has come before this Court as Leave to

12

Appeal Applications filed against the order of the learned District

Judge made on 06.12.2006, this is eminently a fit and proper case

for this Court to invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of this Court

even ex mero motu and set aside the Judgment and order retrial.

In view of that, the learned Presidents Counsel for the petitioners

did not canvass the order dated 06.12.2006. There is much

substance in that submission.

Section 25(1) of the Partition Law reads as follows:

On the date fixed for the trial of a partition action or on any

other date to which the trial may be postponed or adjourned,

the court shall examine the title of each party and shall hear

and receive evidence in support thereof and shall try and

determine all questions of law and fact arising in that action

in regard to the right, share, or interest of each party to, of, or

in the land to which the action relates, and shall consider and

decide which of the orders mentioned in section 26 should be

made.

This section mandates the District Judge trying a partition action

to examine the title claimed by each party in relation to the land to

be partitioned. This he is expected to do quite independently of

what the parties may or may not tell him. That is because

partition actions are not actions in personam, where only the

parties to the action are bound by the Judgment, but actions in

rem, where not only the parties to the action, but also those who

are not parties to the action are also bound by the Judgment.

Therefore, a District Judge trying a partition action cannot be

found fault with for being too cautious, circumspectous and

13

jealous in investigating title to the land and looking beyond what

has been presented before the Court by way of pleadings, evidence

or otherwise to be absolutely satisfied inter alia that all the

necessary parties are before Court and there is no collusion among

the parties.

This paramount duty of thorough investigation of title cast upon

the District Judge in partition actions has been repeatedly stressed

by the Superior Courts from time immemorial.

In Peris v. Perera decided 123 years ago, and reported in (1896) 1

NLR 362, the Full Bench of the Supreme Court led by Chief Justice

Bonser held that:

The Court should not regard a partition suit as one to be

decided merely on issues raised by and between the parties,

and it ought not to make a decree, unless it is perfectly

satisfied that the persons in whose favour the decree is asked

for are entitled to the property sought to be partitioned.

The Full Bench of the Supreme Court headed by Chief Justice

Layard in the case of Mather v. Tamotharam Pillai 6 NLR 246,

decided as far back as in 1908, had this to say:

A partition suit is not a mere proceeding inter partes to be

settled of consent, or by the opinion of the Court upon such

points as they choose to submit to it in the shape of issues. It

is a matter in which the Court must satisfy itself that the

plaintiff has made out his title, and unless he makes out his

title his suit for partition must be dismissed.

14

In partition proceedings the paramount duty is cast by the

Ordinance upon the District Judge himself to ascertain who

are the actual owners of the land. As collusion between the

parties is always possible, and as they get their title from the

decree of the Court, which is made good and conclusive as

against the world, no loopholes should be allowed for avoiding

the performance of the duty so cast upon the Judge.

In Juliana Hamine v. Don Thomas (1957) 59 NLR 546 at 549 L.W de

Silva A.J. Held:

A partition decree cannot be the subject of a private

arrangement between parties on matters of title which the

Court is bound by law to examine. While it is indeed essential

for parties to a partition action to state to the Court the points

of contest inter se and to obtain a determination on them, the

obligations of the Court are not discharged unless the

provisions of section 25 of the Act are complied with quite

independently of what parties may or may not do.

This has consistently been followed up to now. (Vide for instance:

Gnanapandithen v. Balanayagam [1998] 1 Sri LR 391,

Sumanawathie v. Andreas [2003] 3 Sri LR 324, Basnayake v. Peter

[2005] 3 Sri LR 197, Karunaratne Banda v. Dassanayake [2006] 2

Sri LR 87, Silva v. Dayaratne [2008] BALR 284, Abeysinghe v.

Kumarasinghe [2008] BALR 300)

In Sopinona v. Pitipanaarachchi [2010] 1 Sri LR 87 Marsoof J. on

behalf of the Supreme Court held that:

15

A basic principle in all the enactments on Partition Law is that

where there has been no investigation of title, any resulting

partition decree necessarily has to be set aside.

In Cynthia de Alwis v. Marjorie D'Alwis [1997] 3 Sri LR 113 Justice

F.N.D. Jayasuriya remarked:

A District Judge trying a partition action is under a sacred

duty to investigate into title on all material that is forthcoming

at the commencement of the trial. In the exercise of this sacred

duty to investigate title a trial Judge cannot be found fault

with for being too careful in his investigation. He has every

right even to call for evidence after the parties have

closed their cases.

The absence of a party shall make no difference in the discharge of

this statutory duty by the District Judge in a partition action.

That is why in the more recent case of Godagampala v. Peter

Fernando [2016] BLR 139 at 140 Chithrasiri J. on behalf of the

Supreme Court held that:

It is trite law that the examination of such title of the parties in

a partition action is the duty of the trial judge though we

follow the adversarial system in this jurisdiction.

In Wijesundera v. Herath Appuhamy (1964) 67 CLW 63 at 64 T.S.

Fernando J. stated that:

Presence or absence of Counsel makes no difference to the

duty of the learned trial judge to examine both oral and

documentary evidence in a partition case to satisfy himself on

the question of title.

16

Whether or not a party is represented by an Attorney is also beside

the point. In Sirimalie v. Pinchi Ukku (1958) 60 NLR 448, the 9th

defendant who was present in Court at the trial date was

unrepresented. She had not even filed a statement of claim. At

the trial a new position was taken up by the plaintiff who had

pleaded differently. In the result, the said defendant lost any

shares in the land. In revision, the Supreme Court set aside the

Judgment. Sansoni J. remarked:

The Supreme Court has sufficient powers under the Courts

Ordinance and under section 753 of the Civil Procedure Code

to examine, by way of revision, the legality and propriety of

the interlocutory decree which has been entered in a partition

action and the regularity of the proceedings at the trial.

It was the duty of the Court to have asked the 9th defendant

whether she wished to give evidence or to cross-examine the

plaintiff whose evidence was directly against her interests.

Section 35 of the Partition Act requires the Court to examine,

and hear and receive evidence of, the title and interest of each

party.

The learned District Judge, with respect, in the instant case has

failed to discharge his peremptory duty of investigation of title to

the land independently, but, instead, mechanically adopted the

uncontested evidence of the plaintiff in the absence of the

contesting parties to enter Judgment which is practically

unenforceable. If that Judgment is allowed to stand, except the

17th defendant, all the other defendants who are living on the land

with their families will have to leave the land. Whether or not they

are entitled to the soil rights has to be particularly addressed and

17

decided by the District Judge before entering the Judgment. That

matter has never been addressed at the trial or in the Judgment,

which in my view is a fundamental flaw in the Judgment.

In the celebrated case of Somawathie v. Madawala (1983) 2 Sri LR

15 at 23 Justice Soza held that:

Although the Act stipulated that decrees under the Partition

Act are final and conclusive even where all persons concerned

were not parties to the action or there was any omission or

defect of procedure or in the proof of title, the Supreme Court

continued in the exercise of its powers of revision and

restitutio in integrum to set aside partition decrees when it

found that the proceedings were tainted by what has been

called fundamental vice.

This point has been emphatically emphasized in an array of cases

including Jayaratna v. Premadasa [2004] 1 Sri LR 340 at 345,

Maduluwawe Sobitha Thero v. Joslin [2005] 3 Sri LR 25, Velun

Singho v. Suppiah [2007] 1 Sri LR 370.

This right of the Court of Appeal is statutorily protected by section

48(3) of the present Partition Law, which says that notwithstanding

the interlocutory decree and the final decree of partition entered in

a partition action shall have the final and conclusive effect, the

powers of the Court of Appeal by way of revision and restitutio in

integrum shall not be affected by the provisions of this subsection.

This leads me to consider the final question that, when this is a

Leave to Appeal Application filed against an order made by the

learned District Judge (and not against the Judgment per se), can

18

the petitioners through this application ask this Court to set aside

the Judgment acting in revision? They can. If they cannot, the

Court, ex mero motu, can, depending on the severity of the

miscarriage of justice.

Ranesinge v. Henry (1896) 1 NLR 303 Bonser C.J. stated:

This appeal should be dismissed, on the ground that no

appeal lies from a claim order. But Mr. De Saram, who

appeared for the creditor appellant, has asked us to take up

the case in revision, following the precedent of a case recently

decided by this Court (DC, Jaffna, No. 24,021, Civil Min. S.C.,

Oct. 10, 1895). The ground on which he asks us to exercise

our revisionary power is, that the District Judge has made an

order condemning him in costs, which order, he urges, is, on

the face of the proceedings, wrong.

The Supreme Court found the submission to be correct, and held

that:

Therefore, in the exercise of our revisionary power, we quash

the order.

In Marian Beebee v. Seyed Mohamed (1965) 69 CLW 34 Sansoni

C.J. stated:

The power of revision is an extraordinary power which is quite

independent of and distinct from the appellate jurisdiction of

this Court. Its object is the due administration of justice and

the correction of errors, sometimes committed by this Court

itself, in order to avoid miscarriages of justice.

19

In Rasheed Ali v. Mohamed Ali [1981] 1 Sri LR 262 the Supreme

CourtWeeraratne J., Sharvananda J. (later C.J.) and

Wanasundara J.held that:

The powers of revision vested in the Court of Appeal are very

wide and the Court can in a fit case exercise that power

whether or not an appeal lies.

In Sinnathangam v. Meeramohideen (1958) 60 NLR 394 T.S.

Fernando J. held that:

The Supreme Court possesses the power to set aside, in

revision, an erroneous decision of the District Court in an

appropriate case even though an appeal against such decision

has been correctly held to have abated on the ground of non-

compliance with some of the technical requirements in respect

of the notice of security.

In Saheeda Umma v. Haniffa [1999] 1 Sri LR 150 the application for

restitutio in integrum filed by the plaintiff-petitioner could not be

successful as it was prescribed. Nevertheless, as there was a

serious injustice caused to the petitioner, Asoka de Silva J. (later

C.J.) with Weerasuriya J. agreeing ex mero motu granted the relief

invoking the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court:

Powers of Revision of this Court are wide enough to embrace a

case of this nature. Even though the plaintiff-petitioners have

not invoked the revisionary jurisdiction we propose to exercise

the Revisionary powers in favour of the 2nd plaintiff-

petitioner.

20

Vide also Potman v. The Inspector of Police, Dodangoda (1971) 74

NLR 115, Andiappa Chettiar v. Sanmugan Chettiar (1932) 33 NLR

217 at 221-222, Piyadasa v. The Queen (1962) 64 NLR 473 at 474,

Bengamuwa Dhammaloka Thero v. Dr. Cyril Anton Balasuriya

[2010] 1 Sri LR 193 at 205, Rustom v. Hapangama and Co.

[1978/79] 2 Sri LR 225, Ranasinghe v. L.B. Finance Ltd [2005] 2 Sri

LR 393, Mrs. Sirimavo Bandaranayake v. Times of Ceylon Ltd [1995]

1 Sri LR 22, Finance and Land Sales Ltd v. Perera [2005] 2 Sri LR

79.

Where a miscarriage of justice has occurred, as in this case, the

Court of Appeal can, under Article 138 of the Constitution read

with section 753 of the Civil Procedure Code, either ex mero motu

or upon an application made by any aggrieved partynot

necessarily a party to the actionexercise revisionary powers of the

Court to undo the injustice.

For the aforesaid reasons, in the exercise of the revisionary powers

of this Court, I set aside the Judgment and the Interlocutory

Decree entered by the District Court, and direct the District Judge

to hold the trial de novo. The District Judge shall allow any other

parties to intervene, if they so desire. That does not mean that

they all ultimately be entitled to soil rights.

Substantive relief of the petitioners in CALA/507/2006,

CALA/512/2006 and CA/REV/1639/2002 granted.

Let the parties bear their own costs of appeal.

Judge of the Court of Appeal