1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under and in terms of Section 331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. Complainant

CA. No. 237/2013 Vs.

High Court of Weligoda Muditha Chandralal Weligoda

Puttalam Accused

Case No.107/2003 And Now Between

Weligoda Muditha Chandralal Weligoda

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Complainant-Respondent

BEFORE : N. Bandula Karunarathna, J.

: R. Gurusinghe, J.

COUNSEL : Anura Meddegoda PC., with Nadisha Kannangara for

the Accused-Appellant.

Harippriya Jayasundera SDSG., for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 01.03.2021

DECIDED ON : 29.04.2021

2

R. Gurusinghe, J.

The accused-appellant was indicted in the High Court of Puttalam for committing the offence of

grave sexual abuse of three boys under the age of sixteen between 20th October 1996 and 19th

October 1997 at Ilanthadiya within the jurisdiction of the High Court of Puttalam, an offence

punishable under Section 365 (b) (2) of the Penal Code as amended by Act No. 22 of 1995 and

Act No. 29 of 1998. The appellant had pleaded not guilty to the charges. The prosecution

called the prosecution witnesses No. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,9,10,11 and 13. At the conclusion of the

prosecutions case the appellant on being called for his defence had made a statement from the

dock. After trial the appellant was convicted for counts one and two and sentenced to a term

of seven years of imprisonment and also imposed to a fine of thousand rupees with a default

term of imprisonment for one month. The appellant was also ordered to pay fifty thousand

rupees each, to PW1 and PW2. In default of payment of compensation, a term of six months

imprisonment was imposed. The appellant was acquitted of count three.

The accused-appellant has appealed against the said conviction and the sentence.

The following grounds of appeal were set out by the appellant.

1. The prosecution has failed to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt.

2.The learned Trial Judge had failed to consider and evaluate the evidence placed before Court.

3.The learned Trial Judge has misdirected himself with regard to the evaluation of evidence of

witnesses who testified before Court.

4. The learned Trial Judge has failed to consider relevant and pertinent evidence of testimony

of prosecution witnesses.

5. The learned Trial Judge has not considered the relevant evidence.

6. The learned Trial Judge has misdirected himself in the application of criteria to assess the

credibility of witnesses.

3

7. The learned Trial Judge has failed to consider relevant and pertinent evidence in assessing

the credibility of the witnesses.

8. The learned Trial judge has failed to consider the inter se and per se contradictions in the

evidence of the prosecution witnesses.

9. The learned Trial Judge has failed to consider the dock statement and misdirected himself in

the consideration of the dock statement made by the appellant.

The period in which the alleged offence was committed was between 20th October 1996 and

19th October 1997.

PW2 gave evidence first. According to him the incident happened on 20th October 1996. A

complaint was lodged to the police on 6th July 1997. There is about nine months delay.

According to the Respondent, the delay was reasonably explained. On behalf of the Appellant,

it was submitted that the explanations given by PW1 and PW2 for the delay were not plausible

and convincing.

The Trial Judge stated in the judgment that the date of offence was not revealed by PW2. The

date was suggested by the prosecution. PW2 had accepted the date as 20th October 1996.

When giving evidence PW2 was 25 years and PW1 was 29 years old. PW1 and PW2 were 14

years and five months old at 20th October 1996 and 15 th October 1996. The judgment states

that they were only 12 years of age at the time of the offence. Both of them had used a slang

term for intercrural sex. They knew the exact meaning of that term at the time they lodged

the complaint.

The Trial Judge has stated that there was no reason for him to disbelieve the evidence of PW1

and PW2. Further, he says that the reason for not telling the elders were clearly stated by the

witnesses. However, the reasons given by the witnesses and why he believed such reasons

were not discussed in the judgment. The proposition that children would not lie or not concoct

a story cannot be supported when considering the evidence of this case.

4

20th October 1995 was accepted by PW2 as the date on which the alleged of incidence had

taken place. The appellant had shown that 20th October 1996 was a Sunday. The 20th October

1995 was given by PW 1 PW 2 to the police as the date of incident. Both PW1 and PW2 had

admitted that the incident happened on school days and not during a weekend. The Appellant

in his dock statement has stated that he had never stayed at the school during weekends. This

date even though suggested by the prosecution, PW2 had accepted as the date on which the

incident happened. When giving evidence, he was 25 years old. If the date was not sure, he

could have stated so without accepting the suggested date. If the incident happened on a

school day and not during the weekend, there is a serious doubt as to the correctness of PW2s

evidence. In the evidence in chief (at page 64 of the appeal brief) of PW 1he had stated that

on that particular date the school had closed at 2.00 p.m., and he had stayed at home in that

night. PW2 stated (at page 67) that the accused had asked him to stay the night with him. At

page 68 he stated that he had gone to the school room roughly between 7 to 8 pm. By the time

he had gone there, there was Dinesh also. When cross examined, PW2 stated at page 96 and

97 as follows:

: 1997.07.06 ?

: .

: 6.30

.

. ?

: .

There is a contradiction per se. However, the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General argued

that there were no contradictions.

PW2s explanation at page 97 is as follows:

5

:

. .

.

: . . .

When the contradiction was confronted to him, he shrewdly avoided it by saying that he had

gone there on numerous occasions. However, evidence of PW 2 is that the alleged incident

happened to him only once. Again, in the evidence in chief PW2 stated that they had slept on

the floor using mats. (At page 69). During the cross examination he had stated that they had

slept on the desks. (At page 98)

PW2 in cross examination stated as follows (At page 99 and page 101)

: ?

: .

: ?

: .

: ?

: .

: ? ?

: .

: ?

: .

6

At page 101 he says as follows:

.

.

.

: ?

: .

:

?

? , , ?

: .

: ?

: .

: ?

: .

When this contradiction was confronted, he conveniently changed his position. When

he was confronted with the police statement, he swiftly changed the position and

accepted that what had been stated to the police as correct. He avoided the

chance of marking a contradiction with the police statement. However, there are

contradictions per se. PW2 further stated that after this incident they had not gone to

sleep with the teachers. (At page 101 bottom)

.

If this evidence is true, there cannot be a second incident with regard to PW2. In the statement

to the police PW 2 had stated that his younger sister Samadi had come to know about the

7

incident and she had told it to his elder sister PW 4. When PW 4 had asked him, he told her as

to what had happened.

PW 4 did not state the same story. She did not mention anything about what Samadi had come

to know about the incident. PW4s evidence was that her brother, PW2 was scared of one

Nishantha and not of the Appellant. PW4 did not state anything of the alleged offence to PW 2.

According to PW4, PW2 had not told her about the alleged incident.

PW1 gave evidence after PW 2. He stated that there were two male teachers who

stayed in a room in the school. When one of them had gone to their home, PW1 and

PW2 and one Viraj would go there as one teacher was alone. His position was that they

had slept on the desks. PW1 had stated that the accused had intercrural intercourse

with him. Thereafter he did not go to sleep with the teachers for about a month.

After about a month again, he had to go there on the parents request. His evidence is

that the accused-appellant had informed his parents that he avoided the classes and the

parents forced him to go. His position was that he had not divulged this incident to

anybody other than Manju, PW2. PW1s position was that the appellant had slept in

their house also, and the accused had intercrural intercourse there as well. According to

him, there were two rooms and the living room in his house. The appellant and PW 1

had slept on the floor in the living room where such an incident had taken place. No

reason was given for the appellant to sleep at the house of PW 1. When all the

members of the family including the father and the mother were there, to do such a

thing in the living room by the appellant is difficult to believe.

At page 120.

8

.

. .

.

At page 121 PW2 stated as follows:

. .

.

. . 5.30

. .

. .

. .

. .

. .

. .

? . .

.

.

According to PW1, the first incident had happened when the accused, PW2 and PW1

were in the school room at night.

(At page 130)

: , .

?

: .

: , ?

: .

: ? ? ?

9

: .

He had changed his position within the evidence on the same page. He had stated as follows:

: , , ? ?

: .

: , ,

?

: .

The complaint was lodged about nine months after the alleged incident. The explanation was

that the parents believed the accused than PW1. The father and the mother of PW1, PW5 and

PW9 had given evidence. None of them stated that PW1 had shown any reluctance to go to the

school room or PW 1 had often gone to the school room. They did not state anything that they

had trusted the accused than their son. They did not state that there was a proposal to marry

their daughter to the accused. They did not state that the accused had stayed in their house at

any occasion. The reasons given by the PW1 for nine months delay in complaining was not at

all corroborated by his parents.

As per the evidence of PW1 and PW2, they had not divulged the incident to anyone. However,

their evidence was that there were rumours and an anonymous letter was received by the

principal. PW1 did not state any specific date on which the alleged incident happened. He

gave evidence after PW 2.

PW5 had not corroborated the reasons for delay given by PW1. PW13 the medical officers

evidence does not corroborate the alleged offence except the fact that PW1 and PW2 were

produced before him by the Police to examine them. There was not any medical evidence

which supports the version of the prosecution. There were contradictions per se and inter se

of the evidence of PW1 and PW2. Those contradictions were not considered in the judgment.

10

Explanation given by PW1 and PW2 for the delay of nine months to complain was clearly within

the knowledge of the father and the mother of PW1 and the sister of PW2. None of these

witnesses gave any evidence which is supportive of the explanation given by PW1 and PW2.

PW1 did not give any date on which the alleged incident had happened. The explanation given

by PW1 was not plausible. PW1s evidence regarding the alleged offence was not corroborated

by other evidence. The reasons for him to divulge the incident to the parents were also not

convincing. In first complaint he had stated it as follows.

. .

. .

In the evidence in Court, he said that somehow Hyoscine Uncle had come to know the incident

and when Hyoscine Uncle asked him, he had to tell him. Thereafter, Hyoscine Uncle had told

the incident to his father. The evidence of PW 6, Hyoscine Appuhamy stated in his evidence

that PW 1 Dinesh had come and told him. In view of these contradictions and infirmities, the

evidence of PW1 cannot be considered as credible evidence. There are contradictions in the

evidence of PW2 and the explanation given by PW 2 regarding delay in making a complaint to

the police was not supported by the other witnesses who should have known those facts.

According to PW2 the incident did not happen during a weekend. However, the date he had

given was a Sunday. Therefore, the evidence of PW2 cannot be considered as credible.

In a criminal case, the burden of proof is on the prosecution to prove the case beyond

reasonable doubt. In this case, there was no prompt complaint. There are contradictions inter

se and per se.

PW1 had not given any date on which allege offence was committed and thereby made it very

difficult for the accused to set up his defence. The position of PW2 is that the incident had

happened on 20th October 1996, which was a Sunday. PW 1 had given the same date in the

complaint to the police. The PW1 and PW2 stated that the incident did not happen during a

weekend.

11

The appellant had stated in his dock statement that he had never stayed at the school during

weekends. His position was that he used to come to the school on Monday and leave on

Friday.

In the above circumstances, I hold that the charges levelled against the appellant were not

proved beyond reasonable doubt and the conviction is not safe.

It was submitted that the inclusion of both Penal Code (Amendment) Acts No 22 of 1995 and 29

of 1998 in the charges in the Indictment caused a grave and substantial prejudice to the

appellant.

The amendment to the Penal Code effected by Act No 29 of 1998 came into operation with

effect from 4 June 1998. The offence is said to have been committed between 20/10/1996 and

19/10/1997.

In the case of Nimal Senaratna v The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka CA 126/2001 HC

Anuradhapura 17/2000 Decided on 26.08.2014, A W A Salam, J (P/CA) held that the accused

appellant had been adversely prejudiced by the incorrect reference made to Act No 29/1998 in

the charge. His Lordship further stated that This undoubtedly has occasioned in a miscarriage

of justice.

The above case is similar to this case with regard to the charges.

By reason of the appellant having been charged under a Law which was not in force at that

time, I hold that the charges are bad in law.

12

For the reasons set out above, the conviction of the appellant and the sentence imposed on the

appellant is set aside. The appellant is acquitted of the charges. The appeal is allowed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

N. Bandula Karunarathna, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal