==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/CPA/0051/2023

Page 1 of 12

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Revision under

and in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution of

the Republic read together with the Section 11(a)

of the High Court of Provinces (Special Provisions)

Act No. 09 of 1990 against the Judgement

delivered on 31.03.2023 by his Honour the Judge

of Provincial High Court of North Western

Province holden in Kurunegala in case bearing

No. HCW 09/2021.

Ranasinghe Arachchige Premasiri

Ranasinghe,

Embogedara, Magulagama.

Petitioner Vs.

1. K. M. H. S. K. Jayalath,

Co-operative Development Commissioner -North Western province North Western Provincial Department of Co-operative Development 1st Floor, North Western Provincial Council Complex, Kurunegala. 2. Panduwasnuwara New Multi-Purpose Co-

operative Society (LTD) Kurunegala Road, Hettipola. 3. R. M. Sunilrathna - former Chairman

Court of Appeal Case No: CA/CPA/0051/2023 HC Kurunegala Case No: HCW 09/2021

CA/CPA/0051/2023

Page 2 of 12

4. C. G. Ranjith Abyepala - former Vice

Chairman

5. S. Ranjith Dharmasiri - former Director

6. H. M. J. Suriyawansha - former Director

7. S. G. M. Priyantha Bandara – Director

8. H. M. Nishshanka Ramya Kumara -

former Director

9. K. P. Nimal Karunarathne - former

Director

10. H. M. Thusitha Jayantha Siriwardene- Former Director 11. B. H. Kularathne - Former Director,

3rd to 11th Respondents, of: Panduwasnuwara New Multi-Purpose Co-operative Society (LTD) Kurunegala Road, Hettipola.

Respondents AND NOW BETWEEN

Ranasinghe Arachchige Premasiri

Ranasinghe,

Ambogedara, Magulagama.

Petitioner-Petitioner Vs.

1. K. M. H. S. K. Jayalath,

CA/CPA/0051/2023

Page 3 of 12

Former Co-operative Development Commissioner -North Western province North Western Provincial Department of Co-operative Development 1st Floor, North Western Provincial Council Complex, Kurunegala. 1A. Wasantha Gunasekara,

Co-operative Development Commissioner -North Western province North Western Provincial Department of Co-operative Development 1st Floor, North Western Provincial Council Complex, Kurunegala. 2. Panduwasnuwara New Multi-Purpose Co-

operative Society (LTD) Kurunegala Road, Hettipola. 3. R. M. Sunilrathna - former Chairman

3A. H. H. D. Emal Priyantha Herath –

Chairman 4. C. G. Ranjith Abyepala - former Vice

Chairman 4A. H. M. Nishshanka Ramya Kumara - Vice

Chairman

5. S. Ranjith Dharmasiri - former Director

5A. U. H. Lakmal Sanjeewa Premathilake –

Director

6. H. M. J. Suriyawansha - former Director

6A. W. L. Dharmasena - Director

7. S. P. M. Priyantha Bandara – Director

CA/CPA/0051/2023

Page 4 of 12

7A. S. P. M. Priyantha Bandara - Director

8. H. M. Nishshanka Ramya Kumara -

former Director

8A. A. M. Dayananda - Director

9. K. P. Nimal Karunarathne - former

Director

9A. R. D. M. Gnaraththne - Director

10. H. M. Thusitha Jayantha Siriwardene- Former Director 11. B. H. Kularathne - Former Director,

3rd to 11th Respondents, of: Panduwasnuwara New Multi-Purpose Co-operative Society (LTD) Kurunegala Road, Hettipola.

Respondents-Respondents Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J. K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J. Counsel : Asthika Upul Devendra with Jayathu

Wickramasuriya instructed by Manjula Balasoooriya for the Petitioner-Petitioner. P. Witharana, SC for the Respondents. Sapumal Bandara with Vishmi Yapa Abeywardena instructed Thavisha Hettiarachchi for the 2nd to 11th Respondent-Respondents. Written Submissions

CA/CPA/0051/2023

Page 5 of 12

of the Petitioner -Petitioner tendered on : 30.04.2025 Written Submissions of the 1A Respondent -Respondent tendered on : 28.10.2025 Written Submissions of the 2nd to 11th Respondent-Respondent tendered on : 07.11.2024

Decided on : 27.02.2026 K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Instant application in revision arises from a judgement of the learned High Court

Judge of the North Western Province holden at Kurunegala, a copy of which was

annexed to the petition marked as ‘AP8’ (hereinafter called and referred to as

‘the judgement’) wherein, the Petitioner-Petitioner (hereinafter called and

referred to as ‘the Petitioner’) seeks inter-alia, to set aside the judgement and to

grant and issue a mandate in the nature of a writs of certiorari quashing the

appointments of the 10th and 11th Respondents-Respondents as contained in

‘පෙ7’ and the purported decision dated 08.03.2021, a copy of which was annexed

to the petition marked as ‘පෙ11’. On the other hand, the 2nd to 11th Respondent-

Respondents (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the 2nd to 11th Respondents’)

had their Joint statement of objections, sought a dismissal of the instant

application in revision with costs in view of the reasons stated therein.

When this matter came on for hearing before us, Counsel for the parties invited

this Court to dispose of the instant application on the strength of the written

submissions and hence, the instant application will be disposed of on the

strength of the written submissions as urged.

CA/CPA/0051/2023

Page 6 of 12

The instant application in revision arises in this way; The Petitioner in the instant

application, had inter-alia, made an application to the High Court of the North

Western Province holden at Kurunegala praying for a mandate in the nature of

a writ of certiorari to quash the decision made by the 1st Respondent to appoint

the 10th and 11th Respondents as Directors to the Board of Directors of the 2nd

Respondent and as contained in ‘පෙ7’ on the basis that the 1st Respondent had

no authority to appoint the 10th and 11th Respondents as Directors to the Board

of Directors of the 2nd Respondent by reason of the fact that the 2nd Respondent

is not a Co-operative Society operating with State funds within the meaning of

section 60C of the Co-operative Societies Act No. 05 of 1972 as amended

(hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Act’).

While totally, denying the position so adverted to by the Petitioner, the

Respondents in their joint statement of objections filed before the High Court of

the North Western Province holden at Kurunegala, had vehemently, objected to

the application for a mandate in the nature of a writ of certiorari to quash the

decision of the 1st Respondent to appoint the 10th and 11th Respondents as

Directors to the Board of Directors of the 2nd Respondent and as contained in

‘පෙ7’ on the basis that, the 2nd Respondent-Co-operative Society is a cooperative

society operating with State funds as was evident from the documentary evidence

annexed thereto, marked ව1, ව2 and ව3 and therefore, 1st Respondent had

authority to appoint the 10th and 11th Respondents as Directors to the Board of

Directors of the 2nd Respondent and as contained in ‘පෙ7’ and as such, the act

of the 1st Respondent which culminated in the appointment of 10th and 11th

Respondents as Directors to the Board of Directors of the 2nd Respondent, was

solely, within the power vested in him under section 60C of the Act and therefore,

it was intra-vires and hence, the application of the Petitioner should be dismissed

in-limine.

In view of the respective positions so adverted to by the Petitioner and the

Respondents in the High Court of the North Western Province holden at

CA/CPA/0051/2023

Page 7 of 12

Kurunegala as enumerated above, the pivotal question that arose for his

determination by the learned High Court Judge of the North Western Province

holden at Kurunegala was whether or not the 2nd Respondent-Co-operative

Society is a cooperative society operating with State funds. [Emphasis is

mine]

The learned High Court Judge of the North Western Province holden at

Kurunegala had having relied on the documentary evidence produced before it

in their joint statement of objections by the Respondents marked as ව1, ව2 and

ව3 as enumerated above, proceeded to dismiss the application of the Petitioner

for a mandate in the nature of a writ of certiorari to quash the decision of the 1st

Respondent to appoint by ‘පෙ7’ the 10th and 11th Respondents as Directors to

the Board of Directors of the 2nd Respondent by holding that 2nd Respondent Co-

operative Society is a Cooperative Society operating with State funds and

therefore, the 1st Respondent had legal authority to appoint by ‘පෙ7’ the 10th and

11th Respondents as Directors to the Board of Directors of the 2nd Respondent

and as such the act of the 1st Respondent which culminated in the appointment

of 10th and 11th Respondents as Directors to the Board of Directors of the 2nd

Respondent, and which was sought to be impugned in the application before it

by the Petitioner was within his power and therefore, it was intra-vires.

It is this decision of the learned High Court Judge of the North Western Province

holden at Kurunegala that the Petitioner inter-alia, seeks to revise and set aside

in the instant application in revision before us.

It was the position of the Petitioner adverted to, before the High Court of the

North Western Province holden at Kurunegala in support of his application for a

mandate in the nature of writs as enumerated above, that nowhere in the audit

report published by the 2nd Respondent in the 2018, had it been stated that the

2nd Respondent was a Co-operative Society operating with State Funds as

stipulated in Section 60C of the Act as amended. Hence, the position so adverted

to by the Petitioner was that a Co-operative Society in question should

CA/CPA/0051/2023

Page 8 of 12

operate with State Funds at the time of the Registrar going to exercise the

power so vested in him by section 60C of the Act as amended and not before

or after.[Emphasis is mine] However, it appears to be the position of the

Respondents that there was no legal requirement as such contained in the

section 60C of the Act as amended.

The Respondents had along with their joint statement of objections, tendered to

Court documentary evidence marked ව1, ව2 and ව3 in proof of their assertion that

the 2nd Respondent was a Co-operative Society operating with State Funds as

stipulated in Section 60C of the Act as amended.

Upon a careful scrutiny of the documentary evidence marked ව1, ව2 and ව3, it

undoubtedly, shows that the 2nd Respondent-Co-operative Society had operated

with State Funds in the year 2008 and the Petitioner had never sought to refute

it or controvert it by proof on the contrary. Besides, the Petitioner being the

General Manager and/or the Chief Executive Officer of the 2nd Respondent Co-

operative Society during the period relevant to ව1, ව2 and ව3, is now estopped

from denying the fact that the 2nd Respondent-Co-operative Society had operated

with State Funds in the year 2008 for; it was a fact that ought to have been well

within his personal knowledge being the General Manager and/or the Chief

Executive Officer thereof at that time.

It is in this context, let me now, examine section 60C of the Act as amended and

it enacts thus;

“Where the Registrar is of opinion that it is necessary or expedient to do

so for the purpose of ensuring efficient management of the affairs of a

registered society operating with State funds or for the purpose of

safeguarding any investments or advances in money or goods made to

such society by the Government may notwithstanding anything to the

contrary in this Law or any other law or in the by-laws of such society,

nominate such number of persons to be members of the committee of such

CA/CPA/0051/2023

Page 9 of 12

registered society as are in his opinion necessary or expedient for such

purpose :

Provided that the number of such nominated members, shall be less than

one-half of the total number of members of such Committee.”

In the light of section 60C of the Act as amended, where the Registrar is of

opinion that it is necessary or expedient to do so for the purpose of ensuring

efficient management of the affairs of a registered society operating with State

funds.......may notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Law or any other

law or in the by-laws of such society, nominate such number of persons to be

members of the committee of such registered society as are in his opinion

necessary or expedient for such purpose subject always to the proviso thereto.

However, upon a careful analysis of section 60C of the Act as amended, it

becomes manifest that before the Registrar exercises the powers so vested in him

by section 60C of the Act as amended, it would as a pre-condition, be incumbent

upon him to form an opinion that the Co-operative in question is a Co-operative

Society operating with State Funds as stipulated in section 60C of the Act as

amended.

It is to be observed that the section 60C of the Act as amended does not in any

manner, impose such a pre-condition for the Registrar to exercise the powers so

vested in him thereby, to the effect that a Co-operative Society in question

should operate with State Funds at the time of the Registrar going to

exercise the power so vested in him by section 60C of the Act as amended

and not before or after. [Emphasis is mine]

Hence, the Respondents had clearly, established before the learned High Court

Judge of the North Western Province holden at Kurunegala by way of

documentary evidence marked as ව1, ව2 and ව3 that the 2nd Respondent-Co-

operative Society is a Co-operative Society operating with State Funds within the

meaning of section 60C of the Act as amended.

CA/CPA/0051/2023

Page 10 of 12

I would therefore, hold that the learned High Court Judge of the North Western

Province holden at Kurunegala was entirely, justified in dismissing the

application of the Petitioner for a mandate in nature of writs as enumerated

above, by rightly, holding that in view of the documentary evidence marked as

ව1, ව2 and ව3, it had been established that the 2nd Respondent-Co-operative

Society is a Co-operative Society operating with State Funds within the meaning

of section 60C of the Act as amended and therefore, the 1st Respondent had

derived the power under section 60C of the Act as amended to appoint the 10th

and 11th Respondents as Directors to the Board of Directors of the 2nd

Respondent and as such the act of the 1st Respondent which culminated in the

appointment of 10th and 11th Respondents as Directors to the Board of Directors

of the 2nd Respondent, was solely, within the power vested in him under section

60C of the Act and therefore, it was intra-vires and hence, the application of the

Petitioner should be dismissed in-limine.

The relief sought in prayer ‘ඇ’ of his petition of the Petitioner filed in the High

Court of the North Western Province holden at Kurunegala (AP1) is based on the

premise that the decision to interdict the Petitioner by the Respondents as

contained in ‘පෙ11’ was ultra-vires of the powers of the Board of Directors by

reason of the fact that the interdiction of the Petitioner was proposed to the Board

of Directors by the 10th Respondent whose appointment according to the

Petitioner, was ultra-vires of his powers of the 1st Respondent and therefore, is

illegal and no force or avail of law. Hence, it appears that the granting or not

granting of the relief prayed for in ‘ඇ’ of his petition of the Petitioner filed in the

High Court of the North Western Province holden at Kurunegala (AP1) is solely,

dependent upon the granting or not granting of the relief prayed for in prayer ‘ආ’

of the petition of the Petitioner.

The learned High Court Judge of the North Western Province holden at

Kurunegala had held that the decision contained in ‘පෙ11’ is intra-vires of the

powers of the Respondents and therefore, it was legal for; it had been established

CA/CPA/0051/2023

Page 11 of 12

by the documentary evidence marked as ව1, ව2 and ව3 that the 2nd Respondent-

Co-operative Society is a Co-operative Society operating with State Funds within

the meaning of section 60C of the Act as amended and therefore, the 1st

Respondent had derived the power under section 60C of the Act as amended to

appoint the 10th and 11th Respondents as Directors to the Board of Directors of

the 2nd Respondent and as such the act of the 1st Respondent which culminated

in the appointment of 10th and 11th Respondents as Directors to the Board of

Directors of the 2nd Respondent, was solely, within the power vested in him under

section 60C of the Act and therefore, it was intra-vires and hence, the application

of the Petitioner should be dismissed in-limine. On this premise, Court had

rightly, refused to grant the relief as prayed for in prayer ‘ඇ’ of the petition of the

Petitioner filed in the High Court of the North Western Province holden at

Kurunegala (AP1).

In view of the above, I see no error whatsoever, in the judgement (AP8).

Hence, I would hold that the instant application in revision is not entitled to

succeed both in fact and law.

It was brought to our notice by the Respondents in their written submissions

that pursuant to a formal inquiry held into the allegations levelled against the

Petitioner, his services had already been terminated by the Respondents and

therefore, the instant application has now, become redundant and futile and

therefore, it should be dismissed on this ground too.

It is to be observed that the Petitioner had never opted to refute or controvert the

matters so brought to our notice by the Respondents in their written

submissions which clearly, shows that the Petitioner himself had clearly, and

unequivocally, admitted the truth of it for; it was the Petitioner who would be the

best person to controvert it if it was untrue.

I would therefore, hold that the instant application in revision has now, become

redundant and/or futile in view of the fact that his services had already, been

CA/CPA/0051/2023

Page 12 of 12

terminated by the Respondents pursuant to a formal inquiry held into the

allegations levelled by the Respondents against the Petitioner and therefore, the

instant application in revision should be dismissed on this ground too.

In view of my findings as aforesaid, I would think it not necessary to consider

any further the other grounds so urged by the Respondents in their written

submissions filed before this Court.

In the result, I would dismiss the instant application in revision with costs fixed

at 25,000/- payable by the Petitioner to the 2nd Respondent.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL