IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

1

In the matter of an Application for Mandates

in the nature of Writs of Certiorari and Mandamus in terms of Article 140 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

CA (Writ) Application No: 395/2013 Vs.

G.K. Ariyarathne,

Sriya Stores,

Welimadathanne,

Welimada.

1. Dr. P.B. J ayasundara,

Secretary,

Petitioner

Ministry of Finance and Planning,

The Secretariat,

Colombo 01.

2. Mrs. N. Godakanda,

Director General,

Department of Management Service,

General Treasury,

Colombo 01.

3. R. Semasinghe,

Director General,

Department of Trade & Investment Policy,

The Secretariat,

Colombo 01.

4. Dhammika Perera,

Secretary,

Ministry of Transport,

D.R. Wijewardene Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

Before

Counsel

Argued on

5. Hon. Kumara Welgama, M.P.,

Minister of Transport,

Ministry of Transport, D.R. Wijewardene Road, Colombo 10.

6. Sri Lanka Transport Board,

200, Kirula Road, Colombo 05.

Respondents

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne 1.

K. Deekiriwewa for the Petitioner.

Nayomi Kahawita, SC for the Respondents.

: 30/1 0/20 17

Written Submission on: 29/03/2018

Judgment on: 17/05/2018

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

2

Th P .. . d b h d .. f h 3rd dl 1 st 211d 4th 5th e etltloner, aggneve y t e eClSlOn 0 t e an or , . .

Respondents, with holding the issue of a permit for the importation of a motor

vehicle as envisaged in document marked P5, inter alia, is seeking for a writ of

Certiorari to quash the said decision and a writ of Mandamus to compel the said

Respondents to issue a permit to the Petitioner for the importation of a motor

vehicle on concessionary terms.

3

The Petitioner claims that prior to his employment with the 6th Respondent,

he was an employee of the Ceylon Transport Board, the lanatha Santhaka

Pravahana Sevaya Limited and the Cluster Bus companies established under the

relevant statutory provisions. Therefore, the Petitioner contends that his

continuous service in the Sri Lanka Transport Board (6th Respondent) for 12 years,

in a "senior position" entitle him for a duty free permit to import a vehicle on

concessionary terms under the eligibility criteria recognized in paragraph

Ol.Ol.(h), of the treasury circular No. 0112013, dated 02/08/2013, marked P2.

Accordingly, in order to obtain a duty free permit the Petitioner should fulfill the

eligibility criteria as per the said circular dated 02/08/2003, marked P3.

In support of his contention, the Petitioner has drawn attention of Court to

the case of Metropolitan Bus Company Limited Vs. Commissioner of Labour

CAlWrit114312003, where the court held,

"in this instant case, even though the employees were given new letters of

appointment they continued in their employment without a break in service

in the same capacity with the Petitioners after the Petitioners companies

were formed, therefore at the end of the period of the service of the

employees of the Petitioners are liable to pay gratuity for the entire period

of the service of the employees after deducting the gratuity if any was

already paid. The order of the commissioner in this therefore is legal and

the Petitioner has not shown any ground to set aside the said order of the

commissioner

4

Accordingly, the Petitioner contends that, if an employer can be made

liable to pay gratuity for continued service, and employee in similar circumstance

should also be entitled to the issuance of a vehicle permit in terms of the said

Treasury Circular marked P2.

The Respondents submit that, the above case was filed to challenge a

decision of the Commissioner of Labour in respect of payment of gratuity and

therefore, it is totally different from the issue to be determined in the instant case.

The Petitioner has also submitted the case of Labour Officer Vs.

Distilleries Company of Sri Lanka (2000) 2SLR 380, where the Court decided a

similar issue to the issue in CA/Writ1143/2003, where the Court held that:

"Section 7 (c) of Act No. 23 of 1987, (Conversion of Public Corporations

or Government Owned Business Undertakings into Public Companies Act,

hereinafter sometimes referred to as the Act No. 23 of 1987) is

unambiguous in that it requires the employer to add the period of

employment in the corporation to the period of service under the company

for the purpose of gratuity"

As pointed out earlier, the Petitioner has to satisfy Court on the eligibility

criteria for a permit to be issued. The criteria applicable to the Petitioner set out in

sub clause 0 l.0 l. (h) (i), states as follows;

5

"the officers who have actively worked in a Senior Level Executive Grade

for 12 years and have been made permanent in the respective grade in public

corporations and statutory institutions. "

In implementing government policy through circular marked P3, to

determine eligibility of the employees of the 6th Respondent Board and similar

institutions, the Respondents have considered the following criteria, ie, the

completion of 12 years of active service under a fully owned government company

and the seniority at an Executive Grade to be reflected in terms of the

Management Circular No. 30, in order to maintain uniformity m issuing the

permits in terms of P3. The Petitioner IS required to satisfy both of the said

requirements.

The Respondents admit that, the Petitioner was an employee of the Sri

Lanka Central Transport Board and was absorbed into the Cluster Bus companies

established under Act No. 23 of 1987, without any break in his service in spite of

the said companies undergoing several structural changes. However, the question

for determination is whether, the Petitioner can be classified as having completed

12 years of active service under a fully owned government company.

As contended by the Respondents it is observed that, in Labour Officer Vs.

Distilleries Company of Sri Lanka, (2000) 2SLR 380, the question of whether the

employment of the said workers can be considered as employment under, fully

government owned company or not was not gone into by the Court. In order to

6

advance the argument that, the Petitioner was continuously employed in "fully

state owned companies" the Petitioner at paragraph 19, of the Petition has annexed

document marked P8 (a), dated 09105/2003, addressed to the New Eastern Bus

Company by the Director General of Public Enterprises and document marked P8

(b) dated 03/1 0/200 1, a letter addressed to the Sri Lanka Central Transport Board

by the Department of Public Finance.

Documents marked P8 (a), and P8 (b), refers to Treasury share holding in

New Eastern Bus Company Limited and the Metropolitan Bus Company

respectively. The said documents describe the total share holding of the

government in the said entities and classifies such entities as government owned

enterprise. The breakdown of the share holding as reflected in the said documents

indicates that, the Treasury holds the majority of the shares. As reflected. the said

share holding by the treasury cannot be classified to mean that the said entity is

fully owned by the government. Therefore, the Petitioner has failed to satisfy

Court the requirement of the 12 year active service, in a fully owned government

entity and accordingly, the Petitioner is not eligible to obtain a permit under

circular marked P3.

The Respondents have also made reference to the Management Service

Circular No. 30 dated 22/09/2006. marked Rl, and states that, the 6th Respondent

did not re-structure the salaries of its employees under the said management

circular. "in order to make the grades of its employees parallel to the grades of the

7

other public corporations, statutory bodies and fully owned government

companies". Therefore as set out in the said circular, the level of seniority that was

taken into consideration was "'Middle Level Management" in consideration of the

required qualifications of the officers falling under the relevant grades as

stipulated in the said Management Circular No.30. The Petitioners application has

been refused since he had failed to qualify in the said category based on the post

held at the time the application was made for the concessionary permit.

In response, the Petitioner in his counter affidavit at paragraph 06, states

that, the 6th Respondent has taken necessary steps to re-group its employees under

the management circular No 30. However, the Petitioner has failed to satisfy Court

that the said re-grouping has in fact taken place and the grade held by the

Petitioner at the time of making the application conformed to the criteria stipulated

by the said Management Circular. The Petitioner has also failed to show any

illegality in the decision that the Officers Holding Senior Level Executive post

could be considered as being parallel or equivalent to middle level management in

terms of the eligibility criteria as stipulated in the said Management Circular.

Therefore, it is clear in the given circumstances that, the Petitioner has not

satisfied the required criteria as envisaged in circular marked P3, to be eligible for

a concessionary permit.

The Petitioner has also prayed for a writ of Mandamus to compel the

Respondents to issue a permit to the Petitioner for the importation of a motor

8

vehicle on concessionary terms. It is noted that in the instant case the authority

having the power to decide in granting a concessionary permit to import a motor

vehicle has validly exercised its power not to grant the Petitioner a permit.

It is trite law that, a mandate in the nature of Mandamus cannot be issued if

the Petitioner fails to establish a legal right and a corresponding legal duty on the

statutory functionary.

In the case of Perera Vs. National 110 using Development Authority 2001

(3) SLR 50 at page 53 the court held, that;

"on the question of legal right, it is to be noted that the foundation of

mandamus is the existence of a legal right. Mandamus is not intended to

create a right but to restore a party who has been denied his right to the

enjoyment of such right"

In the circumstances the Petition is dismissed without costs.

Parties in C.A. (Writ) 406/2013, C.A. (Writ) 407/2013, C.A. (Writ)

408/2013, C.A. (Writ) 409/2013, C.A. (Writ) 410/2013, C.A. (Writ) 41112013,

C.A. (Writ) 412/2013, C.A. (Writ) 418/2013, C.A. (Writ) 419/2013, C.A. (Writ)

420/2013, C.A. (Writ) 424/2013 have agreed to abide by the Judgment delivered

in this case.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL