'f! '

,-------------------------------------------------------------,

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

C.A.No.195/2015

H.c. Colombo No.6692/2013

***********

In the matter of a Petition of Appeal

in terms of Section 331(1) of the Code

of Criminal

No.15/1979 of

Procedure Act

the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Pathirage Kumara Sampath Dias.

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12

Complainant-Respondent

1

~~-------------------------------------------------------------------------,

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

HON. DEEP ALI WIJESUNDERA, J.

HON. ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

TI1isara Harasgama (Assigned Counsel) for the Accused -Appellant.

H.!. Peiris D.S.G. for the respondent

10th October, 2019

081h November, 2019

****************

HON. ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The accused-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the" Appellant")

was indicted by the Hon. Attorney General for illegal possession of 3.5

grams of heroin and also for trafficking in of the said quantity of heroin.

After trial he was convicted on both counts by the trial Court and

was imprisoned for life in respect of each of these offences. Being

aggrieved by the said conviction and sentence, the appellant seeks to have

them set aside on the basis that;

a. the trial Court had failed to hold that the prosecution version of

the detection of the prohibited drug from the possession of the

appellant is clearly an improbable one,

2

b. the trial Court had erroneously shifted an evidentiary burden on

the appellant,

c. the evidence is insufficient to sustain a conviction on trafficking

in.

In support of the first ground of appeal, the appellant relied on the

following factors to impress upon this Court as to the improbability of the

prosecution case.

i. there was a detection of heroin on the previous day from the

house of one Thushara, in front of which the appellant was

claimed to be wailing for his buyer to turn up to complete the

transaction while being in possession of a quantity of heroin,

11. the likelihood of Thushara's wife permitting the appellant to

use her house to engage in this illegal trade so soon after a

detection which resulted in the arrest of her husband,

111. the likelihood of the arrival of a buyer to a place where a raid

was carried out in the day prior to the instant detection,

iv. the likelihood of the appellant waiting in front of the house,

rather than waiting inside of it while waiting for the

prospective buyer,

v. the failure of the officers of the Police Narcotics Bureau to

conduct a search in house of the appellant, which was located

only a short distance away from the place where the detection

was made,

v!. the officers of the Police Narcotics Bureau have failed to arrest

the prospective buyer who was to arrive at that place in order

3

to complete the transaction after they made the arrest of the

appellant,

vii. PWll, being a member of the raiding party of the previous

day, did not disclose that fact when he participate in the

detection which resulted in the arrest of the appellant,

viii. the detecting officer claimed to have identified the prohibited

substance merely on its appearance even without opening the

packet which allegedly contained some brownish substance.

These factors had to be considered against the backdrop of the case

that was presented before the trial Court by the prosecution, in order to

determine the issue whether it erroneously decided to accept the

prosecution version of events; since the evidence of the detecting officer

fails to satisfy the test of probability, as the appellant claims before this

Court.

It is the case for the prosecution that SI Gayantha of the PNB left his

office at 12.15 p.m. to Maradana to conduct a raid upon information

provided by a private informant of his. However, having waited near the

Railway Station until 1.35 p.m., the witness learnt from his informant that

the delivery of narcotics will not take place that day as expected. He then

decided to abort the planned raid. At that point PC 49446 Abeywickrama,

who acted as the driver of the vehicle, conveyed information about

distribution of narcotics by a person called Kumara of Angoda. He had

made an entry to that effect in his note book and left Maradana at 1.40 p.m ..

According to information, the officers were to meet this informant at

4

Angoda junction who undertook to point out the person who was standing

near Tushara's house with a packet of heroin, in anticipation of the arrival

of his prospective buyer.

At 3.25 p.m. the police party had met the informant and had walked

about 50 meters along Himbutana lane with him. Having reached a point

where a person was standing by the road, the informant then made a

gesture indicating the appellant. Gayantha then conducted a body search

of the appellant who was standing by the side of that lane. This place was

in front of Thushara's house. Search conducted on the person of the

appellant resulted in the discovery of a parcel containing narcotics in his

right trouser pocket. Having arrested the appellant, Gayantha had

proceeded to question him. The witness had thereafter sent for his team

who conducted a search of a house, which was located to the left of the

place of detection on information he received during interrogation of the

appellant. That search yielded nothing suspicious.

During cross-examination of the witness, it was elicited that the

police party did not conduct a search of the appellant's house upon his

questioning it was revealed that he resides in Thushara's house. When they

searched the other house, it was apparent from the person of his personal

belongings, that the appellant was living in that particular house as well.

In addition, the police party conducted a search of Thushara's house as

well. Only a woman and her two children were there.

In relation to the detection, the witness clarified that he did not open

up the parcel containing narcotics to verify as to what it is, but merely by

smelling he suspected that the parcel contained a narcotic substance.

5

Gayantha later came to know that officers of PNB had conducted a

raid on that premises only on the previous day.

The trial Court, in its judgment had considered the prosecution

evidence at length in the light of the various suggestions put to its

witnesses by the appellant. It had also considered the position advanced

by the appellant in his dock statement. Having considered the contents of

the said dock statement the trial Court rejected the same on applying the

tests of probability and consistency. It had then concluded that the

prosecution has proved its case beyond reasonable doubt.

Learned Deputy Solicitor General, in meeting the contention of the

appellant on the relative probabilities of the prosecution version,

submitted that the appellant had in fact used the fact that Tushara's house

was raided the previous day to his advantage by assuring his prospective

buyer that there would not be a threat from PNB for their transaction

because of the raid conducted on the previous day. He added that the

decision to conduct search operations was taken according to the

discretion of the detecting officer who is the best person to assess the

ground situation and to decide whether to carry out such raids or not in

the given set of circumstances. In this instance, learned DSG submitted

that the police party had conducted searches of all relevant places.

In replying to the allegation that the officers did not wait until the

transaction was over, the learned Deputy Solicitor General submitted that

once they made the detection, as per the information received, there was

no necessity to wait indefinitely for the arrival of this prospective buyer to

the place of detection.

6

With these submissions of the parties, this Court could now consider

the merits of the 1st ground of appeal as urged by the appellant.

His contention on this ground of appeal totally rests on the

applicability of the test of probability in relation to the prosecution

evidence. In the circumstances, it is indeed helpful if this Court devotes

some time to examine the several considerations that are employed by the

Courts in applying the test of probability and improbability, In

determining testimonial trustworthiness of the witnesses.

The difficult task of assessing the relative probabilities of conflicting

versions is noted by the House of Lords in the judgment of In Re B [2008]

UKHL 35. Baroness Hale, after considering the indecision reached by the

trial Judge upon the evidence, as indicative from the reproduction of the

following quotation;

" .. . on an approach founded on evidence and reasoning, and not on

suspicion and/or concern, I am unable to conclude that there is no

real possibility that Mr. B sexually abused R as she asserts or

substantially as she asserts and I have therefore concluded that there

is a real possibility that he did it,"

had ventured to observe that:

"We rely heavily on oral evidence, especially from those who were

present when the alleged events took place. Day after day, up and

down the country, on issues large and small, judges are making up

their minds whom to believe. They are guided by many things,

including the inherent probabilities, any contemporaneous

7

documentation or records, any circumstantial evidence tending to

support one account rather than the other, and their overall

impression of the characters and motivations of the witnesses. The

task is a difficult one. It must be performed without prejudice and

preconceived ideas. But it is the task which we are paid to perform to

the best of our ability."

Her Ladyship then added the following observations on

assessing relative probabilities:

"In our legal system, if a judge finds it more likely than not that

something did take place, then it is treated as having taken place. If

he finds it more likely than not that it did not take place, then it is

treated as not having taken place. He is not allowed to sit on the

fence. He has to find for one side or the other. Sometimes the burden

of proof will come to his rescue: the party with the burden of

showing that something took place will not have satisfied him that it

did. But generally speaking a judge is able to make up his mind

where the truth lies without needing to rely upon the burden of

proof"

Lord Hoffman opted to express this position in pure mathematical

terms as follows:

"The law operates a binary system in which the only values are 0

and 1. The fact either happened or it did not. If the tribunal is left in

doubt, the doubt is resolved by a rule that one party or the other

carries the burden of proof If the party who bears the burden of proof

fails to discharge it, a value of 0 is returned and the fact is treated as

8

not having happened. If he does discharge it, a value of 1 is returned

and the fact is treated as having happened."

On the question of assessment of the relative probabilities

conflicting versions, a relevant and important consideration is highlighted

by the South Nrican Appeal Court in ABSA Brokers (Ph) Ltd., v CCMA &

Others (JA 45/03 of 26.05.2005) as it stated thus:

"It is an essential part of the administration of justice that a cross

examiner must put as much of his case to a witness as concerns that

witness. He has not only a right to cross examination, but, indeed,

also a responsibility to cross examine a witness if it is intended to

argue later that the evidence of the witness should be rejected. The

witness's attention must be first be drawn to a particular point on

the basis of which it is intended to suggest that he is not speaking the

truth and thereafter be afforded an opportunity of providing an

explanation. A failure to cross examine may, in general, imply an

acceptance of the witness's testimony ... "

In turning to local authorities, the judgment of Addaraarachchi v The

State (2000) 3 Sri L.R. 393, by this Court was in relation to applying the test

of probability on the evidence of a prosecutrix.

It is stated therein:

"". there is no other way to apply the test of probability and

improbability except by considering the yardstick of accepted and

expected behaviour of women in society. In other words, it is the

9

application of the test of normal human conduct. As Jayasuriya J.

observed in the case ofWickramasuriya v. Dedoleena & others,

II A judge in applying the test of probability and improbability

relies heavily in his knowledge of men and matters and the patterns

of conduct observed by human beings both ingenious as well as those

who are less talented and fortunate."

In this case it would appear that both the trial Judge and the learned

Senior State Counsel who prosecuted (as observed from his written

submissions) seem to have been imbibed with an erroneous notion

that when applying the test of probability and improbability it is the

subjective test and not the objective test that has to be resorted to,

The trial Courts could draw reasonable inferences as to human

behaviour as per the judgment of Ariyasinghe & Others v The Attorney

General (2004) 2 Sri L.R. 357, where it is stated by this Court:

n . that the validity of any inference as to the existence of any facts,

drawn from the proved facts, depends on the facts of the particular

case. The broad general principle, couched in broad language giving

a wide discretion to a trier of fact to be used, having regard to the

common course of natural events, human conduct and public and

private business in their relation to the facts of a particular case,

cannot be curtailed of or restricted by reference to an illustration

10

provided to illustrate the application of the general principle laid

down in section 114 of the Evidence Ordinance."

Returning to the instant appeal, it is noted by this Court that the

challenge mounted by the appellant confines to the acceptance of the

prosecution evidence by the trial Court as truthful and reliable account of

the events that took place. His contention is that the version of the

prosecution is an improbable one and the trial Court was in error when it

decided to accept that evidence.

In fact, thereby the appellant is challenging the validity of the

determination as to the testimonial trustworthiness of the prosecution

witnesses. This is clearly a question of fact and the view formed by the said

Court on the credibility of witnesses who gave evidence before it is

entitled to a great weight, when an appeal against such an order is decided

by an appellate Court.

Coomaraswamy in his treatise on Law of Evidence, Vol. II, Book 2,

p.l053, adds a word of caution in applying the test of probability on a

testimony of a witness.

Learned author states:

" .. . in choosing between witnesses on the basis of probability, a

Judge must bear in mind that the improbable account may

nonetheless be the true one. The improbable is that which may

happen and obvious injustice could result if a story told in evidence

were too readily rejected simply because it was bizarre, surprising or

unprecedented. "

11

It is noted that the complaint by the appellant is that the prosecution

version is teeming with improbabilities. The rejection of the defence case

by the trial Court was not challenged, except to high light the complaint

that the Court had shifted burden on him. Then, the resultant position

would be that the appellant confines his challenge to the improbability of

the version of events as spoken to by the prosecution witnesses.

Law of Evidence by Monir 6th Ed Vol. I at p. 756, had expressed the

general approach of the appellate Courts, should adopt on this question,

following the judgment of the Supreme Court of India in Madhusudan

Das v Narayani Bai 1983 SC 114 in following terms:

"The rule is and it is nothing more than a rule of practice 'that when

there is conflict of oral evidence of the parties on any matter in issue,

and the decision hinges upon the credibility of the witness, then

unless there is some special feature about the evidence of a particular

witness which has escaped the trial Judge's notice or there is

sufficient balance of improbability to dispute his opinion as to where

the credibility lies, the appellate Court should not interfere with the

finding of the trial Judge on a question of fact ... The duty of the

appellate Court in such a case is to see whether the evidence taken as

a whole can reasonably justify the conclusion which the trial Court

arrived at or whether there is an element of improbability arising

from proved circumstances which in the opinion of the Court

outweigh such finding."

It is already noted that the main thrust of the appellant's submission

on this ground is on the probabilities of the prosecution claim that the

appellant chose to sell narcotics near a place where a raid was conducted 12

by PNB merely a day ago. The appellant then poses the question when that

episode was still fresh in mind, would the appellant select such a place to

engage in his trade?

Learned Deputy Solicitor General submitted that the appellant took

the advantage of the situation as no one would expect the PNB officers to

carry out raids on consecutive days over the same place.

When one peruses the relevant proceedings, facts revealed therein

are slightly different to what the appellant contends. The evidence is that

the appellant was seen "near" Thushara's residence and not in it or not in

front of it. It is also relevant to note here that the place where the appellant

disclosed to PNB officers as his usual place of abode is also near to that

house. The appellant had yet another house which was located in the same

neighbourhood. The prosecution evidence is that they received

information that the appellant would deliver a package of narcotics "near"

Thushara's house and not 'in' any of these houses.

In addition to the probability of the explanation of the learned DSG,

it could also be that the appellant used the notoriety of Thushara's house as

a narcotic den in the neighbourhood to direct his prospective buyer to

arrive at their already agreed point of meeting without losing his way, in

order to complete the transaction as it is an easily locatable place. It is a

place where the appellant also felt comfortable with since his own

accommodation was also located almost adjacent to that of Thushara's.

Other probabilities that were connected to this aspect and highlighted by

the appellant therefore assumes lesser significance, when viewed from this

angle.

13

The alleged failure to conduct a search of the house of the appellant

poses no challenge since that fact had been adequately explained by the

witness. It is clear once the officers made a successful detection, they

conducted searches of the two places where the appellant had access to.

They searched Thushara's house and also searched the appellant's usual

place of abode. Same is the position with the allegation that the

prospective buyer was not arrested. Having made a successful detection

and completed the task of searching the houses, the officers are justified in

proceeding to the PNB office without waiting for the buyer of the

appellant to turn up. Considering these circumstances objectively, it is

very likely that if the officers were to wait until his arrival, it would have

been an indefinite one, as by then the news that officers of PNB have made

another detection near Thushara's house would have reached that

prospective buyer, compelling him to change his plans to meet up with the

appellant.

The ability of the witness to identify the narcotic substance by its

mere smell was not challenged by the appellant, though he now wishes to

challenge that claim by the witness. Given the expectance of the officer

concerned, coupled with the fact that his claim of identifying heroin was

not challenged before the trial Court, this would have no adverse impact

on the prosecution evidence on probability.

Thus, the conclusion of the trial Court that the prosecution claim is a

probable one could not be faulted as "the evidence taken as a whole can

reasonably justify the conclusion which the trial Court arrived at". Therefore, it

is the considered view of this Court that the first ground of the appellant is

without any merit. 14

In relation to his second ground of appeal that the trial Court had

erroneously shifted an evidentiary burden on the appellant, it was

contended that when the trial Court concluded that the appellant had

failed to discredit the prosecution evidence ( " Cloltiio El8~ !il<; e(5)(9) lDZCl."),

it had imposed a burden on the appellant to disprove the prosecution.

The appellant had relied on precedents where this Court had interfered

with the conviction when it was apparent that the trial Court with the use

of certain words may have shifted the burden on the appellant.

It is correct that the wording the trial Court had used being "Eloltiio

El8~ !il<; e(5) lDZCl." gives the impression that the trial Court thought that it

was up to the appellant to discredit the prosecution evidence and he had

failed in that task. This is taking this particular sentence out of the context

in which it was inserted in the judgment.

The trial Court had correctly applied the evidentiary burden on the

prosecution and clearly stated in the judgment after the above quoted

portion, it would consider the evidence of the prosecution to determine the

issue whether the challenge mounted by the appellant results in creating a

reasonable doubt in the prosecution case (" EloltiiOlOZEl~ Eloltii ct~eC) 80 00Q1

(9QllD "Ol)3locl "tiicr;) Cl (9Ql) elD)et;lD (5)Ocl ,,(3\tl9 0<;(5) 0001 elD)OlD "Ol)3locl

~Elt; 1!lJlli 0zi!l@lii@e@ lD~ElO ClzOlOcl qztiieC) t; OlD Ot;lD 0(90) 0lz@0 g~o). It

then reiterates this position in the penultimate paragraph of the judgment

clearly as the trial Court was mindful that the appellant need not

disprove the prosecution case and all what the Court needs to do is to

consider whether a reasonable doubt has arisen in its mind. (e'" qQ10

EloltiiOlOz 'i>~elool Ole 0)c11i 3l~ 0zi!l@lii@e@ lD~El eOle08 ozOlocl Cfltii elD)OlD QlO

~0tl90 0l0i!l.)

15

. .

Thus, it is clear what the trial Court meant, when it said" Clo\61o Cl81l1

Qlt; <3(5)@) .!DzCJ.", was not in relation to the burden of proof but in relation to

the unsuccessful attempt of the appellant in cross- examining the

prosecution witnesses to assail their credibility.

In the circumstances, this Court concludes that the second ground of

appeal of the appellant too is without merit.

Lastly the third ground of appeal could be considered. The appellant

contended that the evidence that had been placed before the trial Court by

the prosecution is quite insufficient to sustain a conviction on trafficking in

of a narcotic substance. Learned Counsel for the appellant drew attention

of this Court to the definition to the term" trafficking" as found in section

54A of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as emended.

The said section stated that" traffic" means;

a. to sell, give, procure, store, administer, transport, send,

deliver or distribute; or

b. to offer to do anything mentioned in paragraph (a).

Other than the hearsay item of evidence that the appellant kept the

prohibited substance in his possession to "sell/ deliver / transport/

distribute" there was no other evidence that the appellant was engaged in

any of the above mentioned activity at the time of detection.

16

Learned DSG, following the best traditions of the Attorney Generals

Department, conceded to this pOint by stating to Court that the evidence is

insufficient to sustain a conviction on the charge of trafficking in of heroin.

In view of the above considerations, this Court need not engage in a

detailed analysis of evidence to conclude that the third ground of appeal of

the appellant has merit. This Court therefore affirms the conviction and

sentence imposed on the appellant in relation to the possession of heroin

charge and acquit him of the trafficking charge by setting aside his

conviction on the said charge and the sentence imposed on the appellant

on that account.

Accordingly, the appeal of the appellant is partly allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

HON. DEEP ALI WIIESUNDERA, I.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

17