Page 1 of 10

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal in terms of the

High Court of the Provinces (Special

Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 challenging

the order dated 23-01-2018 by the

Provincial High Court.

Court of Appeal No: Katugasthota Police

CA (PHC) 0007/18 COMPLAINANT

PHC Kandy Case No. Vs.

REV/05/2018

MC Kandy Case No. 1. Rambandi Katugahapihille Gedara

61904/13 Sujatha Kumari Rajapaksha

No. 149/3, Yatihalagala.

2. Wijesundara Mudiyanselage Punchi

Banda Wijesundara

No. 111A/10, Agunawala,

Peradeniya.

3. Weerasekara Mudiyanselage Nimal

Weerasekara

No. 261, Abhilmigama,

Pilimathalawa.

ACCUSED

Page 2 of 10

AND BETWEEN

Palawa Watagodagedara Dhammika

Geethasara Rajapaksha

No. 147, Yatihalagala,

Kandy.

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. Rambandi Katugahapihille Gedara

Sujatha Kumari Rajapaksha

No. 149/3, Yatihalagala.

2. Wijesundara Mudiyanselage Punchi

Banda Wijesundara

No. 111a/10, Agunawala,

Peradeniya.

3. Weerasekara Mudiyanselage Nimal

Weerasekara

No. 261, Abhilmigama,

Pilimathalawa.

ACCUSED-RESPONDENTS

Page 3 of 10

AND NOW BETWEEN

Palawa Watagodagedara Dhammika

Geethasara Rajapaksha

No. 147, Yatihalagala,

Kandy.

PETITIONER-PETITIONER

Vs.

1. Rambandi Katugahapihille Gedara

Sujatha Kumari Rajapaksha

No. 149/3, Yatihalagala.

2. Wijesundara Mudiyanselage Punchi

Banda Wijesundara

No. 111a/10, Agunawala,

Peradeniya.

3. Weerasekara Mudiyanselage Nimal

Weerasekara

No. 261, Abhilmigama,

Pilimathalawa.

ACCUSED-RESPONDENTS-

RESPONDENTS

Page 4 of 10

Before : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

: P. Kumararatnam, J.

Counsel : S. A. D. S. Suraweera for the 1st Respondent

: Chathura Galhena for the 2nd and 3rd Respondents

: Petitioner-Petitioner in person

Argued on : 19-07-2023

Written Submissions : 17-05-2022 (By the 2nd and 3rd Accused-Respondents)

: 09-03-2022 (By the Petitioner-Appellant)

Decided on : 24-10-2023

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

The aggrieved party-petitioner-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the appellant)

has filed this appeal being aggrieved of the order dated 23-01-2018 by the

learned High Court Judge of the Provincial High Court of the Central Province

Holden in Kandy, wherein the revision application preferred by him was in limine

dismissed without the notice being issued to the respondents mentioned in the

application.

When this matter was taken up for argument, the appellant appeared in person

and made his submissions to the Court, while the first defendant-respondent

and the 2nd and 3rd defendant-respondents were represented by their respective

Counsel.

Katugasthota police has filed a complaint and a charge sheet against the

accused-respondents named in this appeal charging them for trespassing into a

land claimed by the appellant on 22-06-2010 in a place called Yatihalagala, and

Page 5 of 10

thereby committing the offence of criminal trespass punishable in terms of

section 433 read with section 32 of the Penal Code.

After trial, learned Additional Magistrate of Kandy by his judgement dated 27-

11-2017 has acquitted the accused-respondents on the basis that the

prosecution failed to prove the charges against them beyond reasonable doubt.

The learned Additional Magistrate has found that the land claimed by the

petitioner who was the prosecution witness number 01 at the trial, was a land

sold to the 1st accused-respondent by way of a bank auction conducted by the

Bank of Ceylon, where a certificate of sale has been issued in the name of the 1st

accused-respondent.

The complaint of the appellant to the police had been based on the premise that

the 1st accused-respondent and the 2nd and the 3rd accused-respondents who

were bank officials attached to the relevant Bank of Ceylon branch trespassed

on to his land.

The learned Additional Magistrate of Kandy has found that there was insufficient

evidence to prove the charge against the accused-respondents and accordingly

acquitted them of the charge preferred against them.

Against the said judgement, the appellant has preferred an application in

revision numbered 05/2018 dated 09-02-2018 before the Provincial High

Court of the Central Province Holden in Kandy seeking to set aside the order of

the acquittal by the learned Additional Magistrate of Kandy.

When the matter was taken up before the learned High Court Judge of Kandy to

support for notices on 23-01-2018, the learned High Court Judge by her order

pronounced on the same date has dismissed the revision application without

considering the merits of the same.

It appears from the case record that the petitioner has represented himself and

when it was informed to the Court by him that he is ready to support his

application in person, instead of hearing the appellant, the learned High Court

Page 6 of 10

Judge has put several questions to him. The line of the questioning by the

learned High Court Judge appears to be that in terms of section 318 of the Code

of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979, no appeal shall lie from an acquittal

by a Magistrates Court except at the instance or with a written sanction of the

Hon. Attorney General and no sanction has been obtained.

It appears from the answers provided by the appellant to the Court for the

questions posed to him that the appellant has written to the Hon. Attorney

General, seeking his written sanction to file an appeal challenging the judgement

of the learned Additional Magistrate. However, since the required sanction was

not forthcoming within the stipulated time limit to file an appeal, the appellant

has filed the revision application before the Provincial High Court and he has

explained to the Court the reasons for his filing of the revision application.

In his revision application, the appellant who was the petitioner before the High

Court has indicated that in addition to the provisions of High Court of the

Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990, he is relying on section 7 read

with section 320(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act to file the revision

application before the High Court.

It appears from the line of questioning by the learned High Court Judge, the

learned High Court Judge has wanted the appellant to withdraw his revision

application on the basis that he has failed to obtain the prior permission of the

Hon. Attorney General and had failed to get an order by way of a writ against the

Hon. Attorney General.

Since the appellant has indicated that he is willing to accept an order by the

Court, the learned High Court Judge of the Provincial High Court of the Central

Province Holden in Kandy has pronounced the impugned order against which

the appellant has preferred this appeal.

In her reasoning for the dismissal of the appellants revision application, the

learned High Court Judge has stated as follows,

Page 7 of 10

318 .

"

" .

,

318

.

318

.

In his submissions before this Court, the contention of the appellant was that

the application filed by him before the Provincial High Court of the Central

Province Holden in Kandy was an application in revision and not an appeal, and

the learned High Court Judge was misdirected when he wanted to support his

application in determining his application as an application that should have

been filed in terms of section 318 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act. He

moved for the setting aside of the order made by the learned High Court Judge

solely on that basis, and sought reliefs as prayed for in his petition of appeal.

The contention of the learned Counsel for the 1st accused-respondent was that

the learned High Court Judge was correct when the revision application was

dismissed since there was no basis for the appellant to file a revision application

before the High Court. The learned Counsel for the 2nd and the 3rd accused-

respondents took up the position that the petitioner has filed the revision

application before the High Court without pleading any exceptional ground

Page 8 of 10

which requires the intervention of the Court by invoking its revisionary

jurisdiction and has failed to follow the necessary rules of procedure when filing

his revision application by failing to file together with his petition and the

affidavit, the proceedings before the Magistrates Court or even the charge sheet

filed before the Magistrates Court against the respondents. The learned Counsel

for the accused-respondents moved for the dismissal of the appeal on that basis.

There cannot be any argument that in terms of the 13th Amendment to the

Constitution, the High Courts of the Provinces established under the amendment

shall have the same revisionary jurisdiction granted to the Court of Appeal in

terms of Article 138 of The Constitution.

The relevant Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution reads as follows.

154P(3)(b). Notwithstanding anything in Article 138 and subject to

any law, exercise, appellate and revisionary jurisdiction in respect of

convictions, sentences and orders entered or imposed by Magistrates

Court and Primary Courts within the province.

It is clear that the relevant article was silent on revisionary jurisdiction in respect

of acquittals. However, it is settled law that the Court is empowered to exercise

its jurisdiction in revision on an application of an aggrieved person who is even

not a party to the record. (see Appuhamy Vs. Weerathunga 23 NLR 467)

It is also settled law that the revisionary jurisdiction is an extraordinary

discretionary remedy granted in terms of the Constitution to the relevant

appellate Court which should be exercised only in exceptional circumstances

and having regard to the facts of each case.

I find that the learned High Court Judge should have allowed the appellant to

support his application for revision, rather than having a confrontational

approach towards him, and decided whether the appellant has a legal basis to

get the notices issued against the respondents mentioned or not. I find that the

learned High Court Judge was totally misdirected and has given a wrong

Page 9 of 10

interpretation to section 318 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act on the basis

that it refers to an appeal or a revision application against an order of acquittal

whereas section 318 only refers to the filing of an appeal against an acquittal.

I find that the learned High Court Judge was wrong when the application of the

petitioner was refused without its merits being considered to find out whether

there exists any basis to issue notices against the respondents mentioned.

I find that if the application was considered in its correct perspective, there would

have been no basis for the appellant to get the notices issued against the

respondents mentioned as the 1st accused-respondent had a legal right to obtain

the possession of the land purchased by her through a bank auction and there

was no evidence that she was trespassing on to the land under the possession

of the appellant. There was no basis for the charge to be maintained against the

2nd and the 3rd accused-respondents who were bank officials engaged in fulfilling

their official commitments.

I find that the learned Additional Magistrate of Kandy was correct in dismissing

the action filed by the Katugasthota police against the accused-respondents as

the prosecution has failed to establish the charge against the said respondents.

As I considered above, although the learned High Court Judge was misdirected

as to the way the revision application filed by the appellant was in limine

dismissed, I am of the view that even if the revision application was considered

on its merit, there would have been no basis for the appellant to get the notices

issued to the accused-respondents mentioned.

I am of the view that sending the case back to the relevant High Court for the

consideration of whether to issue notices or not on the merits of the application

would serve no purpose under the circumstances as I have considered above.

For the above reasons considered, the appeal is dismissed, as it would serve no

purpose in maintaining the application filed before the Provincial High Court of

the Central Province Holden in Kandy any further.

Page 10 of 10

The Registrar of the Court is directed to communicate this judgement to the

Registrar of the Provincial High Court of the Central Province Holden in Kandy

for information, together with the original case record.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal