1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under section 154(p)

of the Constitution read with Section 331 of the

Criminal Procedure ACT No. 15 of 1979.

Court of Appeal Case No: The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

CA HCC 114/18 Complainant

High Court Of Colombo VS.

Case No: HC 7613/2014 Abdul Rahuman Noordeen Mohomed Faizer

Accused AND NOW BETWEEN Abdul Rahuman Noordeen Mohomed Faizer

(Presently at Welikada Prison)

Accused-Appellant VS The Hon. Attorney General Attorney Generals Department Colombo 12. Respondent

2

Before : Devika Abeyratne,J

P.Kumararatnam,J

Counsel : Neranjan Jayasinghe for the Accused- Appellant Suharshi Herath, SSC for the Respondent Argued On : 05.05.2021 and 03.11.2021 Decided On : 02.12.2021 ******************** Devika Abeyratne,J

The accused appellant was indicted in the High Court of Colombo for

trafficking and for being in possession of 7.21 grams of Heroin which are

offences punishable under section 54 A ( a ) and 54 A (d) of the Poisons, Opium

and Dangerous Drugs Act No 13 of 1984.

After trial, the accused was acquitted on the charge of trafficking and was

convicted for being in possession of 7.2 grams of Heroin and was sentenced to

life imprisonment.

Aggrieved by the conviction, and sentence imposed by the learned High

Court Judge of Colombo, the appellant has preferred this appeal to this Court on

the following grounds of appeal.

3

i.) The evidence of the main two witnesses of the prosecution

fails the test of credibility and probability.

ii.) Rejection of the evidence of the defence had been done on

unreasonable grounds.

iii.) Prosecution had failed to prove the chain of productions.

According to the prosecution case, pursuant to information received by PC

Bandara PW 2, from an informant that a person called Faizal from New Moor

street is bringing some illicit drugs, after following the usual procedure, a team

led by PW1 and five other officers including PW 2 had gone for the raid towards

the Maharoof Water tank in a van and met the informant at about 15.10 hours

on 23.3.2013. Thereafter, PW 1, PW 2 and the informant had walked about

20-25 meters away from the parked van. They were stationed near the water tank

seated inside a three wheeler as requested by the informant who was standing

outside on the road, close to it.

After being pointed out by the informant the accused appellant who was

wearing a blue colour T shirt and a sarong was apprehended, searched and taken

into custody at about 3.25 pm (15.25 hours) by PW 1 and PW 2 when a parcel of

heroin which was in the knot of the sarong was detected. After returning to the

Narcotic Bureau at 16.00 hours the production was sealed and kept in the personal

locker of PW 1 until it was handed over to CI Rajakaruna on 25.03.2013 who

has taken it to the Government Analyst. The gross weight at the PNB is 25 grams

and 500 mg. According to the Government Analyst the gross weight is 24 grams

and 86 mg and the and the net weight of the pure heroin is 7.21 grams.

There were no contradictions or omissions highlighted in the evidence of

PW 1 and PW 2.

4

The accused appellant denying the charges levelled against him opted to

make a statement from the dock and called three witnesses, a friend, his nephew

and a police officer for his defence.

According to the very long dock statement, on 23.3.2013 around 9.30 and

10.30 in the morning the appellant had gone to collect a News Paper for witness

Zaik Hussain who has visited him at the Lodge the appellant owned. A person

called Baba known to the Appellant had come in a three wheeler with another

person and after querying whether he was the person, had forcibly taken him in

the three wheeler to a parked van somewhere at Centre road and assaulted

continuously questioning him about kudu. He was brought back to the lodge

where his nephew witness Akbar Ali was present at that time. The lodge had been

searched and thereafter he had been taken near a church( palliya) in Kolonnawa

where he had been left in the vehicle with the driver for over one and a half to

two hours and brought to the Fort Police station where the sealing of production

had taken place. He had at first refused to sign the production, but after being

threatened and assaulted he has done so. On the following day he had been

remanded by a learned Magistrate.

According to defence witness Zaid Hussain, around 9.30 on the day of the

incident, when the appellant had come to get a news paper for him, he has seen

three people taking the appellant in a three wheeler. At first he had thought that

the appellant was talking with a friend but word had spread that it was the police

who took the appellant. Half an hour later the appellant was brought by two

police officers in a van who searched the lodge and took the appellant away.

Akbar Ali the nephew of the appellant has testified that when witness Zaid

Hussain came, the appellant had left the lodge with Zaid and he following the

appellant out of the lodge. He had seen a parked three wheeler with some people

5

in army suits. (page 197 in red) The appellant who was talking in tamil to the

three wheeler driver had got in with another person and then driven away. As the

people on the road were discussing that it was the police who took the appellant

away, he has gone in search of his uncle to Wolfendhal Street and Dam Street

Police Stations without any success. When he returned to the lodge, the appellant

in hand cuffs was brought by 6 people in a van and the lodge had been searched.

Thereafter according to him a Police officer had taken his telephone number when

he asked where they were taking his uncle . However, admitted that the family of

the appellant had been informed that he would be produced to the Maligakanda

Courts on the following day.

According to the prosecution witnesses the appellant was arrested in the

afternoon on a one way street that branched off from Armour street and after the

arrest he was straightaway taken to the PNB. They do not speak about a search of

the Lodge.

According to the defence witnesses the appellant was taken in a three

wheeler from the road near a saloon when he went to get a news paper. One

witness has said he was seen talking to a three wheeler driver in Tamil and the

other witness has testified about men in army suits near the three wheeler.

However, it had been suggested by the Counsel for the appellant in page 79 that

the appellant was arrested at the Lodge around 11.30 in the morning.

: , 201.03.23

11.30 . 198,

.

: .

:

6

?

: .

.

:

?

:

In page 107 of the brief it is stated that the birth certificate and the receipt

relating to the Identification Card of the appellant was taken from the lodge when

the police visited the second time. ( page 107 bottom). Therefore, it appears that

the position of the defence is that the Police visited the Lodge twice, which is

rejected by the prosecution witnesses.

In page 151 of the Brief it had been suggested to PW 2 that the appellant

was taken into custody at 11.30 at the Lodge which was denied by that witness.

Thus, it is clear that an issue is raised regarding the place and the time of

arrest. There are no contradictory evidence of the prosecution witnesses regarding

the place and the time of arrest.

The first ground of appeal is that the evidence of the two main witnesses

fail the test of probability and credibility. Some of the improbable evidence

referred to are as follows; it was submitted that when there was no evidence

elicited to whom the three wheeler belonged, it was improbable that PW 1 and

PW 2 to be seated inside the vehicle for ten to fifteen minutes without being

questioned by the owner of the vehicle on such a busy street. It is in evidence that

it was the informant who pointed out the three wheeler to the witnesses to be

seated and he was waiting outside. No evidence elicited that the three wheeler did

7

not belong to or was in the possession of the informant. It is also a probable

situation if someone queried, as they were Police officers in civil clothes, they

could have easily identified themselves. In the above circumstances it cannot be

considered as an improbability.

It is also submitted that there was no explanation given as to why the

production was kept for two days without being handed over to CI Rajakaruna.

PW 1 had explained that it was in his personal locker which is permitted by the

authority.

According to the evidence given on behalf of the appellant from the OIC

PNB CI Kevin Christopher, PW 1 had left for a raid with another team at 18.15

hours and returned at 22.05 hours on 23.03.2013. It is the position of the defence

that it is an improbability based on the evidence of PW 1, where he has stated that

the sealing of the production has commenced after returning to the PNB at 16

hours, and his testimony in page 108 of the brief that he entered notes at 18.20

hours at the PNB. Therefore, according to the defence it is improbable for PW 1

to have taken part in two raids which the trial judge has failed to consider.

According to officer Christophers evidence in page 210 of the brief the

officers who have left for the raid at 18.15 has been led by one SI Lionel. At page

211 of the brief, SI Udaras name together with the names of the other constables

who took part in the raid are entered. It is also in evidence that SI Udara (PW 01)

has left for a raid at 14.20 hours and that the appellant who was arrested in that

raid has been handed over at 17 hours. The issue to be considered here is when

PW1 says his entry notes are at 18.20 hours , whether he could have participated

in the other raid where the officers left the PNB at 18.15 hours.

: 54/176 ?

8

: 18.15 .

: 6.15 ?

: .

: ?

:

.

: 18.15

?

: .

: ?

: ... 4335, , ... 1509 ,

.. 60980 , .. 70731 ,

.

No evidence has been elicited that one officer cannot participate in two

raids on one day. The defence has not put forward this position to PW 1 when he

was cross examined. The evidence of PW 1 that he left for a raid at 14.20 hours

and the person arrested, who is the appellant, was handed over to the PNB at 17

hours has been corroborated by the defence witness Kevin Christopher. As stated

earlier PW 2 has corroborated the evidence of PW 1 regarding the arrest and the

place of arrest.

Therefore, it appears that either the time of 18.20 hours given by PW 1 as

the time of entering his notes or the time in the information book given as 18.15

hours as the time the officers left for the other raid is erroneous. In my view the

said position should have been suggested to PW 1 at the trial. After failing to do

so the Counsel has submitted that position only at the appeal stage.

9

In Edrick De Silva Vs Chandradasa De Silva 70 NLR at 170 Justice

H.N.G. Fernando observed that when there is ample opportunity to contradict the

evidence of a witness but is not impugned or assailed in cross examination that

is a special fact and feature in the case, it is a matter falling within the definition

of the word proof in section 3 of the Evidence Ordinance and a trial judge or

court must necessarily take fact in to consideration in adjudication the issue

before it.

Ukkuwa v the Attorney General [2002] 3 SLR 279, is a case where Justice

S. Tilakawardana held that matters of fact that could have been challenged and

clarified at the trial Court are precluded being challenged at the Appellate Court

in the following manner at page 282;

Furthermore, there had been no questions under cross-examination

relating either to the genuineness of document P14, nor to the authorship of such

document which were the matters of contest that were brought up before this

court. Nor was there any challenge raised even through cross-examination of the

identity of this witness who claimed to have carried out the examination of the

substance taken from the possession of the accused-appellant. This evidence

given by the Senior Assistant Government Analyst, Mr. Sivarasa, has not been

challenged in the proceedings before the original High Court, and is for the first

time being challenged before this court. In this sense, court is mindful of the fact

that having had the opportunity to cross-examine the witness before the original

court and having failed or neglected to avail himself of the opportunity of such

examination on these matters which could have been clarified, had such

objections or cross-examination being raised in the original court, the counsel is

precluded from challenging the veracity of such matters of fact before this court.

10

It is noted that in page 233 of the brief, after correctly evaluating the

evidence of both PW 1 and PW 2, the learned High Court Judge has concluded

as follows;

..... . 01 18.20 . . 01 6.15 10.05 , 18.20 6.20 . . 01 . . 01 . . , . 01 . 02 . .

In Dharmasiri V. Republic of Sri Lanka [2010] 2 Sri L.R. 241, it was said;

Credibility of a witness is mainly a matter for the trial Judge. Court of

Appeal will not lightly disturb the findings of trial Judge with regard to the

credibility of a witness unless such findings are manifestly wrong. This is because

the trial Judge has the advantage of seeing the demeanour and deportment of the

witness

Considering the above reasons we reject the position of the appellant that

it was improbable for PW 1 to participate in two raids, and affirm the conclusion

of the trial judge on this point.

The second ground of appeal is that the learned Judge has rejected the

evidence of the defence on unreasonable grounds. In pages 234 and 234 of the

brief the trial judge has evaluated and analysed the evidence adduced on behalf

11

of the defence adequately. It is stated that the position taken in the Dock

Statement, the alleged continuous assault he underwent in the hands of the

arresting officers and the other positions he took up in the dock statement had not

been put to the prosecution witnesses.

In Sarwan Singh vs. State of Punjab AIR 2002 SC 3652, Indian Supreme

Court in the said case observed thus: it is a rule of essential justice that whenever

the opponent has declined to avail himself of the opportunity to put his case in

cross-examination it must follow that the evidence tendered on that issue ought

to be accepted this judgment was cited with approval in the case of Bobby

Mathew Vs. State of Karnataka 2004 3 Cri. L.J page 3003.

On perusal of the defence evidence it is apparent that it has not raised a

reasonable doubt in the prosecution case.

The next ground of appeal is that the prosecution failed to prove the chain

of production. The Government Analyst who gave evidence in this case has

confirmed the gross weight and that the production was in tact when it was

received. The argument that there was a delay in handing over the production to

CI Rajakaruna has been explained as it had been in the personal locker in the

safe custody of PW 1.

In Kamrudeen v AG (SC Appeal No. 90/2013 Decided on 25.07.2019:

(Malalgoda J) at page 13 and 14 has held The failure by the officers of the PNB

to take the productions before the Magistrate and keeping the productions in

police custody for 05 days were also raised by the Presidents Counsel , .In

the absence of any challenge with regard to the inward journey by the Presidents

Counsel, I see no basis to uphold his objection.

12

The prosecution witnesses have testified without any omissions or

discrepancies being highlighted.

In Devunderage Nihal Vs Attorney General, SC/Appeal 154/2010,decided

on 03.01.2019 it was held that there is no need to call for corroborative evidence

in respect of the evidence of a police officer who conducted a raid. In the instant

case the prosecution has called two witnesses, PW 1 who was in charge of the

raid and PW 2 who was also engaged in the raid, the arrest, detection and sealing

of the production. No material contradictions or omissions were marked in the

evidence of these two witnesses. On evaluation of evidence of the prosecution

witnesses in this case I do not see any reason to disbelieve them in the official

duties that they have performed.

On consideration of the above facts, this Court is of the view that the

several grounds of appeal raised by the appellant are without merit. Therefore,

the judgment dated 05.07.2018 of the learned High Court Judge of Colombo is

affirmed. The appeal is accordingly dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

P.Kumararatnam,J

I Agree JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL