g

1

.1 j j I f J t I

1 t 1 i

~ 1 I

f J j I

. ~

.1 l j I t , j I 1 i j I i j I I I I I I j j I i I I

.1 !

J 1 1 I

t I 1 i i,

l

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Court of Appeal Case No. CA 135/2005

High Court of Kandy.

Case No. HCC 300/ 2003.

In the matter of an appeal against an order of the High Court under Section 331 of the Criminal Procedure Code Act No. 15 of 1979

The Attorney General of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka .

Complainant

Ranwadana Mudiyanselage Seneviratne

Dharmapala alias Ralahamy.

Accused Vs.

And Now Between

Ranwadana Mudiyanselage Seneviratne

Dharmapala alias Ralahamy.

Accused -Appellant

Vs,

The Attorney General of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Complaina nt-Respondent

Before : S. Thurairaja PC, J & A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J

Counsel : Saliya Pieris PC with Arjuna Rathnasiri and Geeth Karunarathne

Attorneys-at-Law for the Appellant.

Dappula De Livera PC, SG with P. Kumararathnam DSG and

Lakmali Dissanayake SC for the Respondent.

Written Submissions : Accused Appellant- 31 st October 2018.

Argument on

Judgment on

Complainant Respondent-12th November 2018.

: 21 st September and 15th October 2018.

: 26th November 2018.

******************

JUDGMENT

s. Thurairaja. PC. J

This is a case of Double Murder, reported at the Police Station of Kandy. After the

investigation and the non-summary inquiry, Honourable Attorney General had

preferred an indictment against the Accused-Appellant, Ranwadana Mudiyanselage

Seneviratne Dharmapala alias Ralahamy (hereinafter sometimes called and referred

to as the Appellant) for committing the murder of Amitha Kumari Seneviratne and

Rasika Sakuni Seneviratne which is punishable under Section 296 of the Penal Code.

The Appellant was a retired Police Officer.

The prosecution has led the evidence of Ariyaratne Bandara Mawilmada (the main

witness), Rajanayaka Mudiyanselage Meththananda Rajanayaka (the Grama Niladhari

of the No.259 Grama Niladhari Division), Professor Kohilawatta Gamage Harry

Chandra Nimal Seneviratne (the husband of the deceased Amitha Kumari

Seneviratne), Bethmage Don Sirisena (the servant of Professor Kohilawatta Gamage

Harry Chandra Nimal Seneviratne, Godagama Widanachchilage Kamal Chandana

Ariyawansa (Police Officer who received the first information), Ranaweera

Mudiyanselage Loku Banda (the Additional Registrar of the Kandy Land Registry),

Fedrick Appuhamilage Lionel Jayasinghe (Journalist of Wijaya News Papers),

,~

j I I ! I 1

) l

Karunaratne Wijenayake (Administrative Officer-Wijaya News Papers), Rohitha

Rajapakse (Bank Assistant), Sepala Mudiyanselage Janaka Kelum Sen erath Bandara

(Police Officer), Wellampulli Arachchilage Ananda (retired Police Officer), A.B.

Seneviratne (Judicial Medical Officer), Hulangamuwa Gedara Sirisena, Dissanayake

Mudiyanselage Indra Kumari, Samarakoon Mudiyanselage Sarath Samarakoon,

Gurusinghe Danawardane (Chief Inspector of Police), Segu David Mohommed Farook

and Registrar Pathmarajah Pathmadakshan.

According to the prosecution witnesses the Appellant was living in the same

neighbourhood of the deceased persons. On the 25th July 2001, the Appellant

together with the main witness, Ariyaratne Bandara Mawilmada had gone to the

house of the deceased which is situated at the Prime Rose Garden, Kandy. The 1 st

deceased is a wife of a professor who is attached to the University of Peradeniya. The

2nd deceased was 12 years of age at the time of the incident, was a child of the 1 st

deceased. According to the main witness, there were some issues about draining of

rain water from the land of the Appellant and the witness. On the day of the incident,

the Appellant was seen approaching the 1 st deceased and speaking to her. There, it

was noticed that the deceased was scolding the Appellant which resulted the

Appellant attacking the deceased. She was taken into the house, at that time the 2nd

deceased was seen calling her mother. The Appellant bundled her up and carried her

to the room. Thereafter she was found dead. The 1st deceased had 50 injuries on her.

Cause of death was manual strangulation. The 2nd deceased who was 12 years old

and died of ligature strangulation.

After the trial before the High Court Judge of Kandy, the Appellant was found guilty

for Culpable Homicide not amounting to murder for the death of the 1 st deceased

and sentenced to 10 years rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 50,000/-. For the

2nd count, the Appellant was found guilty for murder of the 2nd deceased and

sentenced to death.

! I I J j

I I

~

Being aggrieved with the said convictions and sentences the Appellant preferred an

appeal to the Court of Appeal and submitted following grounds of appeal.

1) Whether the witness namely Mawilmada is an accomplice and therefore

verdict on such evidence is fatal in the absence of any independent

corroboration.

2) Whether the witness Mawilmada is a credible witness in the light of material

contradictions and the improbability of his evidence and the improbability of

the Police Evidence.

3) Whether the Learned High Court Judge has failed to consider material

contradictions.

4) The Learned High Court Judge should not have allowed evidence in respect of

the forgery of a deed or the land dispute to be led as its connection to the

prosecution version is very remote and unfair by the accused.

5) The Learned High Court Judge has failed to fairly evaluate the evidence of the

Accused and the rejection of the evidence of the Accused and his daughter

were for trifling reasons.

When the matter was taken up for argument the Learned President's Counsel

confined to the following grounds of appeal for consideration.

1) The Trial Court erred in law that Mavilmada was not an accomplice.

2) Mavilmada's evidence is unworthy of credit.

3) Application to prove contradictions were rejected was unfair.

4) Court evaluation of Police evidence regarding Section 27(1) recovery was

unreasonable.

5) Rejection of evidence of Appellant and his daughter was erroneous in Law and

unreasonable.

6) Court allowed certain evidence which are irrelevant and prejudicial to the

appellant

The 1st and 2nd grounds of appeal are taken together. According to the witness,

Mavilmada he had purchased adjoining land of the deceased and there was issue of

draining of rain water. It appears there were some other issues between the

deceased and the appellant regarding occupation of another land in the same

vicinity. On the day of the incident, the appellant had invited the main witness to

come there and get to know the neighbours. When Mavilmada went together with

the appellant to the house of the deceased, the appellant had entered to the

premises of the deceased. The witness observed that the deceased was scolding the

appellant on certain issues. The appellant was seen assaulting the deceased with a

handle like stick. The deceased was 5 feet 5 inches. The appellant was a retired police

officer was much built than her. When the deceased fell on the ground he had seen

the appellant was kicking her on the chest area. The witness had seen the deceased

was bleeding. The appellant, had asked the witness to hold her legs to carry her

away. Mavilmada who claims that he was scared, obeyed to the ordered of the

appellant. He held the legs to carry the deceased into the room.

At that time the 2nd deceased, who was 12-year-old was heart calling "mummy" and

coming there. The appellant was seen carrying the child like a bundle of firewood to

the room. The witness had not seen attacking of 2nd deceased.

The Judicial Medical Officer (JMO) who conducted the post mortem had found the

weapon used on the deceased was a blunt weapon. When shown a rolling pin which

was recovered on a Section 27 (1) statement, the JMO opined it is possible to cause

those injuries with such instrument. The 1st deceased had fracture on her ribs; the

JMO confirms that, it is possible with kick on the ribs.

There are many other materials which corroborate the evidence of the 1st witness.

Therefore, the finding of the Learned Trial Judge that the witness is worthy of credits

can be accepted.

j 1 1 f I

\ I I

J J 1

The Learned Trial Judge extensively considered the issue whether this witness was an

accomplice or not. He had given sufficient and tenable reasons to find that the main

witness was not an accomplice.

E.R.S.R. Coomaraswamy in his book titled "The Law of Evidence" Vol. II, Book I at

page 364, states as follows;

"For the purposes of section 774 (f), it may be said that an accomplice is one

concerned with another or others in the commission of crime. "

He cites with approval the following passage from Wharton on Criminal Evidence

11th Ed. Vol. II at page 1229 -

"An accomplice is a person who knowingly, voluntarily and with common intent

with the principal offender unites in the commission.

In Attorney General vs. D. Seneviratne [1982 - Volume 1, Page No - 302] it was

stated that,

':4n accomplice is a guilty associate whether as perpetrator or as incitor or

helper in the commission of criminal acts constituting the offence charged of a

lesser or kindred offence of which the accused could be found guilty on the same

indictment. Where there are special circumstances which only the accused can

explain the accused must offer an explanation. II

"From the cases three main definitions can be formulated:

(7) An accomplice witness is one who could have been convicted of the actual

offence with which the accused is charged as a principal.

(2) An accomplice witness is one who could have been convicted of the actual

offence with which the accused is charged whether as principal, aider and

abettor, or counseLLor. This test is adopted in Sri Lanka and in some other

jurisdictions. In EngLand the House of Lords heLd that on the existing case Law

the term accompLices includes accessories after the fact and by an extended

application receiver of stoLen goods on the triaL of the thief, and parties to other

crimes (of a type identicaL with the crime charged against the accused) when 4

evidence to prove system and intent and to negative accident is sought to be

Led ..... In Sri Lanka 8asnayake J (later CJ.) in Peiris v DoLe and JayatiLeke J (Later

CJ.) in The King v Piyasena adopted the definition of O'Sullivan A. J. C in

ChetumaL RekumaL v Emperor that an accomplice is a guilty associate in crime

or one who sustains such a reLation to the criminaL act that he couLd be jointLy

charged with the accused.

(3) An accomplice witness is one whose Liability to prosecution arises from the

same facts as that of the principaL offender.

In The King V. Peiris Appuhamy (43 NLR 412) it was held that,

"The question whether a person is an accompLice is for the Jury to decide.

It is the duty of the Judge to direct the Jury as to what association with the crime

wouLd constitute a person an accomplice. If a person is an accomplice it is the

duty of the Judge to warn the Jury that it wouLd be unsafe to convict without

corroboration and to expLain to them the Law as to what constitutes

corroboration.

Evidence in corroboration must be independent testimony which affects the

accused by connecting or tending to connect him with the crime. A witness who

mereLy assisted in the disposaL of the dead body but who did not take part in the

perpetration of the crime is not an accomplice. The question whether a person is

an accomplice is for the Jury to decide. It is the duty of the Judge to direct the

Jury as to what association with the crime would constitute a person an

accomplice "

G.P.S. de Silva, c.J. in Alwis vs. Piyasena Fernando [1993 (1) SLR 119] held that,

"it is well established that findings of primary facts by a trial Judge who hears

and sees witnesses are not to be lighty disturbed on appeal."

In King vs. Rankira (42 NLR 145) held that,

"the Court of Appeal will not interfere with the judicial discretion of a judge in

passing sentence unless that discretion has been exercised on a wrong principle."

We carefully perused evidence before and the judgement of the Trial Judge. We are

convinced that the findings of the Trial Judge is well founded hence we have no

reasons to interfere with the same.

Accordingly, the 1st and 2nd grounds of appeal fail on its own merits.

The 3rd and 5th grounds of appeal were taken together for consideration. When the

counsel was presenting his argument in the half way he informs Court since the

contradictions are not proved properly he is not emphasizing in that ground.

Anyhow we carefully perused the contradictions raised (even though most of them

are not proved) and cross checked with the judgement of the Learned Trial Judge.

Considering both grounds together we are of the view that the Learned Trial Judge

had adequately considered all available evidence before him and reached to a

reasonable finding. Hence we find that these two grounds of appeal fail on its own

merits.

The 4th ground of appeal IS that Section 27 (1) statement IS unreasonable and

untenable.

Section 27 (1) of the Evidence Ordinance reads as follows:

"Provided that, when any fact is deposed to as discovered in consequence of

information received from a person accused of any offence, in the custody of a

police officer, so much of such information, whether it amounts to a confession

or not, as relates distinctly to the fact thereby discovered may be proved. "

Considering this ground of appeal, we find that the police had recovered a rolling pin

(a cylindrical wooden object used in kitchen to make rotti or chapatti). It is the

contention of the counsel that, recovering the object after several months cannot be

accepted. The council submits that in the light of two deaths in that family, alms

giving and using of kitchen could have disturbed the place where it was kept.

The using of kitchen items, when the lady of house is not there will be very

subjective. The husband of the deceased submits that he did not use the kitchen

much. Then it's left with the visitors who used the kitchen. The main witness

described the object and says it was similar to that. The JMO opined most of the

injuries could have been caused with an instrument like the rolling pin. The Learned

Trial Judge had comprehensively analysed the acceptability of the statement and the

production. And he had come to his own conclusion. As we discussed earlier the Trial

Judge is the best person to see the production, observe demeanour and deportment

of witnesses. When the Judge concludes that he accepts the evidence we have no

reasons before us to disbelieve the same. When we consider the submission,

judgements and facts of the case, we find that there is no merit in this ground of

appeal.

The last ground of appeal is that the certain prejudicial evidence against the

accused-appellant are allowed. The counsel is not very specific in his submissions of

this ground of appeal. Regarding the main witness, the Learned Trial Judge had given

ample reasons to reject the evidence of the accused and his witnesses.

We carefully considered the judgement of the Learned Trial Judge and we observed

that the entire trial was taken up before the same judge and the judgement also

delivered by him. So, he had the benefit of seeing, hearing and analysing all the

witnesses, materials and facts. The Learned Trial Judge was not disturbed by any

external factors. That is clearly established by the fact the Learned Trial Judge had

found the death of the 1 st deceased as Culpable Homicide not amounting to murder

on the basis of available evidence before him. If he was influenced by any other

extraneous factors as submitted by the submissions, the Learned Trial Judge would

have convicted for murder. The finding of the Learned Trial Judge was after giving

reasons for such conclusion. The finding regarding death of the 2nd deceased the

Learned Trial Judge had ample evidence to conclude that the death of the 12-year-

old child is nothing but murder. Hence I find that the Learned Trial Judge had utilized

his judicial trained mind to hear, conclude and find his own findings.

As we discussed above, all grounds of appeal had failed on its own merits.

After careful consideration, we find the judgment of the Learned Trial Judge is well

found and we have no reasons to disturb the same.

Accordingly, we dismiss the appeal and affirm the conviction and the sentence. We

direct the High Court of Kandy to implement the sentence from today.

Appeal Dismissed.

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne. J

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL