Page 1 of 5

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

In the matter of an Appeal under Article 154P (6) of the Constitution read with Section 11(1) of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No.19 of 1990.

Court of Appeal Case No.: CA (PHC) 51/ 2018 PHC of Sabaragamuwa Province (holden in Ratnapura) Case No: RA 41/2015 Magistrate's Court: Case No: 63111

1. Godakawela Kankanamlage Sunil Jayarathne 2. Pussallage Jinadasa 3. Pussallage Sumanawathi 4. Pussallage Janenona 5. Kapuge Punchi Mahaththaya 6. Daulkarage Somawathi Niyangama, Godakawela.

PETITIONERS Vs. 1. Maddegoda Vidaanelage Jaysinghe

Near to Niyangama School, Godakawela 2. Weediya Kapuraalalagee Heennilame

In front of the school, Niyangama, Godalawela.

RESPONDENTS

AND NOW BETWEEN 1. Maddegoda Vidaanelage Jayasinghe

Near to Niyangama School, Godakawela 2. Weediya Kapuraalalagee Heennilame

In front of the school, Niyangama, Godalawela.

RESPONDENTS-PETITIONERS 1. Godakawela Kankanamlage Sunil Jayarathne 2. Pussallage Jinadasa 3. Pussallage Sumanawathi 4. Pussallage Janenona 5. Kapuge Punchi Mahaththaya 6. Daulkarage Somawathi Niyangama, Godakawela.

PETITIONER-RESPONDENTS

AND NOW BETWEEN 1. Maddegoda Vidaanelage Jayasinghe

Near to Niyangama School, Godakawela 2. Weediya Kapuraalalagee Heennilame

In front of the school, Niyangama, Godalawela.

RESPONDENTS-PETITIONERS-APPELLANTS

Page 2 of 5

Prasantha De Silva J.

Judgment This is an appeal emanating from an order of the Provincial High Court of the Sabaragamuwa

Province holden at Ratnapura.

It appears that the 1st 6th Petitioners, being the Complainants had filed information in terms

of Section 66(1)(b) of the Primary Court Procedure Act No. 44 of 1979 in the Magistrates

Court of Palmadulla in the case bearing no. 63111 against the 1st and 2nd Respondents.

Before:

Prasantha De Silva, J.

K.K.A.V. Swarnadhipathi, J.

Counsel:

J.P. Gamage A.A.L with Chamara Fernando A.A.L for the Respondent-Petitioner-Appellants.

D.D.K. Kotugampola A.A.L for the Respondents.

Written Submissions

filed on:

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellants filed written submissions on 20/03/2023.

Petitioner-Respondent-Respondents filed written submissions on 14/12/2023.

Delivered on: 15.05.2023

Vs. 1. Godakawela Kankanamlage Sunil

Jayarathne 2. Pussallage Jinadasa 3. Pussallage Sumanawathi 4. Pussallage Janenona 5. Kapuge Punchi Mahaththaya 6. Daulkarage Somawathi Niyangama,

Godakawela.

PETITIONER- RESPONDENT-

RESPONDETNTS

Page 3 of 5

The learned Magistrate who was acting as the Primary Court Judge having satisfied that there

was a breach of peace threatened or likely to be threatened due to a dispute over a roadway,

issued notice on the 1st and 2nd Respondents.

It was alleged by the Petitioners that both Respondents had obstructed the roadway which

was used by the Petitioners and their predecessors for more than 70 years to go to their

cultivated lands and houses. The portion of the disputed road was seized and narrowed by

erecting concrete poles by the Respondents.

The learned Magistrate had taken up the matter for inquiry and allowed parties to file

Affidavits and Counter Affidavits with annexed documents and also written submissions.

It was the position taken up by the Respondents that they had not obstructed the impugned

roadway and had stated that the Petitioners had never used a roadway as referred to in their

affidavit and the Petitioners had only used a footpath.

The learned Magistrate delivered the Order on 15.09.2015 in favor of the Petitioners and

directed the Respondents to remove all obstructions caused by them.

Being aggrieved by the said Order, the 1st and 2nd RespondentPetitioners had moved in

Revision to the Provincial High Court of Sabaragamuwa holden in Ratnapura seeking to

revise or set aside the said Order of the learned Magistrate.

Apparently, the learned High Court Judge having considered the Revision application, held

against the 1st and 2nd RespondentPetitioners and affirmed the Order of the learned

Magistrate dated 15.09.2015.

The 1st and 2nd Respondent Petitioner - Appellants (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the

Appellants), being dissatisfied with the said Order of the learned High Court Judge, had

preferred this appeal praying to set aside the Order dated 04.01.2018 by the learned High

Court Judge and the Order dated 15.09.2015 of the learned Magistrate,

It is noteworthy that the Appellants have prayed for a declaration that 1st 6th Petitioner

Respondent Respondents are entitled to use the disputed roadway as a footpath. Therefore,

the dispute among the parties is relating to a roadway which is in existence.

As such, the learned Magistrate had correctly dealt with the matter and decided in terms of

Section 69(1) of the Primary Court Procedure Act.

In terms of Section 69(1) of the Primary Court Procedure Act, it is the duty of the Primary

Court Judge to determine as to who is entitled to the right which is the subject of the dispute

and make an Order under Section 69(2).

Page 4 of 5

It is observable that the learned High Court Judge had properly evaluated and analyzed the

evidence placed before the learned Magistrate.

It is stated in the Order of the learned High Court Judge:

2015.04.01 .

8 . E F . E ( ) . .

2015.04.22 .

, . E F . .

Therefore, it is noteworthy that the learned Magistrate had come to the correct findings of

fact and law and had come to the correct conclusion that the disputed roadway had been

used by the Respondents for a long period of time and the Appellants had interrupted the

Petitioner-Respondents-Respondents [hereinafter referred to as Respondents] right of way by

erecting concrete poles and thereby, narrowed the disputed roadway to a footpath.

As such, the learned High Court Judge has affirmed the order of the learned Magistrate and

held that no exceptional circumstances existed for the Appellants to invoke the Revisionary

jurisdiction of the Provincial High Court of Sabaragamuwa holden in Ratnapura and

dismissed the revision application of the Appellants.

Hence, we see no reason for us to interfere with the Order dated 15.09.2015 of the learned

Magistrate and the Order dated 04.10.2018 of the learned High Court Judge,

Page 5 of 5

Therefore, the appeal is dismissed with costs fixed at Rs. 25,000/-.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K.K.A.V. Swarnadhipathi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL