==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 8

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal in terms of Section 320 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979. T. L. Jayasinghe Inspector of Police, Police Station, Monaralaga. Complainant CA HCC (PHC) 00172/2022 High Court of Monaragala Vs. HC (Revision) 43/22 1. Arumugam Antan Muthukumarana Ariyasiri Morters waththa, Galwala Road, Kumbukkana. 2. Mohamad Kasim Mohomad Nizam 11 Kanuwa,

Monaragala Road, Buttala.

Accused Ekanayaka Mudiyanselage Anuradha Amila Ekanayake, Pangolla, Dombagahawela, Monaragala.

Animal Carer B. Wijekumarathunga R/09, Thora Ara, Athiliyawewa.

Animal Owner -Appellant

Page 2 of 8

AND BETWEEN B. Wijekumarathunga R/09, Thora Ara, Athiliyawewa.

Animal Owner -Applicant-Petitioner Vs, 1. Arumugam Antan Muthukumarana Ariyasiri Morters waththa, Galwala Road, Kumbukkana. 2. Mohamad Kasim Mohomad Nizam 11 Kanuwa, Monaragala road, Buttala.

Accused- Respondents 3. Ekanayaka Mudiyanselage Anuradha Amila

Ekanayake, Pangolla, Dombagahawela, Monaragala.

Animal Carer- Respondent-

Respondent 4. T. L. Jayasinghe, Inspector of Police, Police Station, Monaralaga.

Complainant- Respondent 5. The Attorney General, Attorney General’s Depatment, Colombo 12. Joint Respondent AND NOW BETWEEN

Page 3 of 8

B. Wijekumarathunga R/09, Thora Ara, Athiliyawewa. Animal Owner -Applicant -Petitioner-Appellant Vs, 1. Arumugam Antan Muthukumarana Ariyasiri Morters waththa, Galwala Road, Kumbukkana. 2. Mohamad Kasim Mohomad Nizam 11 Kanuwa, Monaragala road, Buttala.

Accused-Respondents- Respondents 3. Ekanayaka Mudiyanselage Anuradha Amila

Ekanayake, Pangolla, Dombagahawela, Monaragala.

Animal Carer- Respondent-Respondent 4. T. L. Jayasinghe Inspector of Police, Police Station, Monaralaga.

Complainant- Respondent-Respondent 5. The Attorney General, Attorney General’s Depatment, Colombo 12.

Joint Respondent-Respondent

Page 4 of 8

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran. J, Amal Ranaraja. J, Counsel: Udaya Sri Keerthiwardena for the Petitioner-Appellant

Wishwa Wijesooriya, S.G. for the Respondents

Argued on: 28.01.2026 Judgment on: 18.02.2026

Judgment

Amal Ranaraja. J,

1. The Monaragala police have submitted a report together with seized

evidence and summarised statements to the Monaragala Magistrates Court,

in Case No. BR 1292/2022. This submission of a report has pertained to an

incident involved the arrests of suspects for allegedly committing offences

under the Animals Act No.29 of 1958 (as amended).

2. Among the seized evidence had been cattle. The learned Magistrate has

issued an interim order directing that the cattle be temporarily consigned to

the custody of an animal care centre approved by the line minister or a

person actively involved in animal welfare, pending the final determination

of the case.

3. The alleged owner of the cattle aggrieved by the interim order issued by the

learned Magistrate on June 24th, 2022, has filed a revision application with

the High Court in Monaragala seeking to have the order set aside and the

cattle released to him.

Page 5 of 8

4. Upon the consideration of the revision application the learned High Court

Judge has dismissed it in the first instance and refused to issue notice to

the respondents named therein. Aggrieved by this order the purported

owner who was also the petitioner in the revision application has preferred

the instant appeal to this court.

5. During the argument of the matter the learned Counsel for the appellant

contended that the provisions of Chapter XXXVIII of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act no 15 of 1979 are applicable to the situation at hand

specifically concerning the disposal of property that constitutes the subject

matter of the offence. Consequently, that the learned Magistrate erred in law

and her disputed order cannot stand.

6. The learned State Counsel has directed the court’s attention to section 3AA

(1) of the Animals Act, a provision introduced by Amendment Act no. 10 of

2009. He has thereafter asserted that the application of such section’s

provisions is paramount operating not withstanding anything to the

contrary in any other written law where an offence relating to the Animals

Act is committed. Accordingly, he has further contended that the disputed

order must be upheld.

“Section 3AA (1) of the Animals Act No.29 of 1958 (as amended) is as

follows;

3AA. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any other

written law, where an offence in relation to an animal is

committed and where such offence is brought to the notice of the

Magistrate having competent jurisdiction, the Magistrate may,

pending the determination of the case, make an interim Order to

the effect that the animal against whom the offence has been

committed. (a) be handed into the custody of an Animal Care

Centre approved by the Minister by Order published in the

Gazette; (b) be handed over to any non-governmental

organization whose primary objective is concerned with the

Page 6 of 8

welfare of animals; or (c) be handed over to the custody of any

person whom the court is satisfied, is actively engaged in caring

for animals.”

7. This provision enables the Magistrate pending the final determination of a

case to issue an interim order directing the animal/animals against which

the alleged offence has been committed to be;

i. Handed into an animal care centre approved by the relevant

minister,

ii. Handover to any non-governmental organisation whose primary

objective is animal welfare or,

iii. Handover to the custody of any person whom the court is

satisfied is actively engaged in caring for animals.

8. Further, the provision in section 3AA (1) of the Animals Act takes precedence

over all conflicting laws. In essence when a statute states that it applies

“notwithstanding any other law”, it asserts its supremacy over any

conflicting laws that may exist. This phrase serves to create clear

boundaries, ensuring that the new provision will take precedence even if

another law might suggest otherwise. The use of “notwithstanding”

underscores the principal of legal hierarchy. In instances where laws might

contradict each other this term acts as a decisive mechanism allowing one

law to override others.

9. In light of these circumstances as the provision in Section 3AA (1) has been

enacted subsequently, the appellant’s assertion that the provisions outlined

in chapter XXXVIII of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act would apply to the

matter at hand is unpersuasive and ultimately fails to hold.

10. In delivering the disputed order, the learned magistrate has referred to

section 3AA (1) of the Animals Act. She has carefully examined the

provisions outlined in this section and applied the relevant facts to the law.

Page 7 of 8

Upon her analysis she has concluded that the welfare of the cattle was

paramount and issues the disputed order preliminarily for the benefit of the

animals involved.

11. Furthermore, it is important to note that the disputed order is, by its nature,

a temporary measure. This provides the appellant with a significant

opportunity to establish his case during the inquiry conducted as per the

provisions in section 3AA(3) of the Act that will follow the trial to assert his

claim to the cattle. Considering these points, it is evident that the disputed

order issued by the learned Magistrate is legally sound and justified.

12. Moreover, the learned High Court Judge has taken the necessary time to

examine the matters discussed above. After due consideration he has

determined that there are no exceptional circumstances warranting the

revision application that was forwarded to the High Court, which seeks to

challenge the relevant order made by the learned Magistrate.

13. In Fattal vs. Wallbrook Trustee (Jersey Ltd) CA [2008] EWLA CIV 427, the

Court of Appeal of England and Wales has observed the following;

“An appellate court should not interfere with case management

decisions by a judge who had applied the correct principles and who

had taken into account matters which should be taken into account and

left out of account matters which are irrelevant.”

14. In those circumstances I am not inclined to interfere with an order of the

learned Magistrate dated June 24th, 2022, or with that of the learned High

Court Judge dated September 28th, 2022, and affirm the same.

15. I dismiss the appeal

I make no order regarding costs

Appeal dismissed.

Page 8 of 8

16. The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgement to the

Magistrates Court in Monaragala for information/compliance together with

the original case record if it has been forwarded to this court.

Judge of the Court of Appeal B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Judge of the Court of Appeal