Page 1 of 28

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of

section 331 (1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979, read with

Article 138 of The Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

CA/HCC/0178-0179/2018 COMPLAINANT

Vs.

High Court of Colombo 1. Wawalage Uthum Prasanna Rosairo

Case No: HC/7556/13 alias Malli

2. Umagiliya Kankanamge Daminda

Priyashantha alias Baba

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Wawalage Uthum Prasanna Rosairo

alias Malli

2. Umagiliya Kankanamge Daminda

Priyashantha alias Baba

ACCUSED-APPELLANTS

Page 2 of 28

Vs.

The Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENT

Before : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

: P. Kumararatnam, J.

Counsel : Rienzie Arsecularatne, P.C. with Chamindri

Arsecularatne, Thilina Punchihewa for the 1st Accused

Appellant

: Darshana Kuruppu with B. Thilakaratne for the 2nd

Accused-Appellant

: Janaka Bandara, D.S.G. for the Respondent

Argued on : 27-11-2023

Written Submissions : 13-12-2022 (By the 1st Accused-Appellant)

: 29-04-2019 (By the 2nd Accused-Appellant)

: 14-02-2020 (By the Respondent)

Decided on : 05-04-2024

Page 3 of 28

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

The accused-appellants (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the 1st appellant

or the 2nd appellant) were indicted by the Hon. Attorney General before the High

Court of Colombo of the indictment dated 12-09-2014 in the following manner.

1. That the 1st accused committed an offence punishable in terms of the

Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended by

Amendment Act No. 13 of 1984 by trafficking 20.28 grams of

Diacetylmorphine, which is commonly known as Heroin, at Maligawatta

within the jurisdiction of the High Court of Colombo, on or about 23-

01-2013, and thereby committed an offence punishable in terms of the

above-mentioned Ordinance.

2. At the same time and at the same transaction, the 1st accused had in

his possession, the earlier mentioned quantity of Diacetylmorphine,

and thereby committed an offence punishable in terms of the Poisons,

Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended.

3. At the same time and at the same transaction as mentioned in count

1, the 2nd accused aided and abetted the 1st accused to commit the

offence of trafficking of Heroin, and thereby committed an offence

punishable in terms of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs

Ordinance as amended.

The 1st accused mentioned in the indictment is the 1st appellant, while the 2nd

accused mentioned is the 2nd appellant.

It appears that on 18-01-2016, the name of the 2nd appellant had been amended

to be read as Umagiliya Kankanamge Daminda Priyashantha alias Baba. When

the indictment was read over to the accused-appellants, both of them had

pleaded not guilty and the trial has commenced on the same day.

PW-01 who was the police officer who conducted the raid in this regard has

concluded his evidence-in-chief on 04-03-2016 and after the conclusion, the

prosecution has moved to amend the indictment.

Page 4 of 28

The learned Counsel who represented the accused-appellants had objected to

the indictment being amended as sought on the basis that it would entirely

change the complexion of the charges against the accused-appellants. However,

the amendment had been allowed by the learned High Court Judge.

The prosecution has amended the indictment on 29-07-2016 in the following

manner.

1. Count 1 on the 2nd line, by removing the word and by replacing

it with the word , and by replacing the word in line 10

of the charge by the word .

2. Count 2 by replacing the word , which appears in line 1 with

the word , and by replacing the word that appears in

line 9 with the word .

Accordingly, it appears that the prosecution has amended the 1st and the 2nd

count in the indictment to show that both the accused-appellants had jointly

engaged in the offence of trafficking and possessing the quantity of Heroin

mentioned in the charges.

As a result, the original 3rd count which was the count preferred against the 2nd

appellant had been removed from the indictment.

It appears from the proceedings of that day, although the amendment has been

made to the indictment, which has changed the complexion of the indictment,

the said amendment has not been read over to the accused-appellants requiring

them to plead to the amended charges.

Even though the prosecution has informed the Court that the evidence-in-chief

of PW-01 was concluded on 04-03-2016, it appears that after the amendment,

the prosecution has led further evidence of PW-01.

Several other witnesses have concluded their evidence thereafter, and on 02-06-

2018, the prosecuting State Counsel has made yet another application to amend

the indictment on the basis that in the 1st amendment, although the word

Page 5 of 28

was replaced with the word , the original 1st and 2nd counts which

referred to the 1st accused as the offender has not been deleted. Therefore, it had

been sought to amend the two counts to that effect.

The said amendment had been allowed, and the 1st and the 2nd count had been

amended by deleting the word and adding the word in both the

counts.

The amended charges had been read over to the accused-appellants, and they

have pleaded not guilty to the charges. With the said amendment, the

prosecution has closed the case and after the defence being called, the accused

have made dock statements.

Accordingly, the matter has been fixed for the judgment on 10-07-2018 by the

learned High Court Judge, after allowing both parties to file written submissions,

apart from their oral submissions.

However, on 10-07-2018, the learned High Court Judge has recorded the

following observation;

. 167

.

.

This has prompted the prosecuting State Counsel to realize the serious

discrepancy as to the place of the offence mentioned in the indictment and what

was stated by PW-01 in his evidence.

The indictment states that the offence was committed at Maligawatta, whereas

the evidence had been on the basis that the offence was committed at Horton

Place, Colombo 07.

Page 6 of 28

The prosecuting State Counsel has urged the Court to make the necessary

amendment to the charges in terms of section 167 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act in order to bring the charges in line with the evidence led before

the Court in relation to the place of the offence.

The learned Counsel who represented the accused-appellants before the High

Court has vehemently objected to the indictment being amended at the stage of

the judgment, claiming that this would affect their defence and would gravely

prejudice the accused-appellants.

However, the learned High Court Judge by pronouncing a separate order in this

regard has determined that the Court has the power to amend or alter any

indictment or charge any time before the judgment is pronounced, and it is

necessary for the Court to consider if an amendment is made, whether it would

prejudice the accused or cause damage to the defence position taken up at the

trial.

It has been determined that the prosecution version has been that the incident

happened as Horton Place near a building called Mel Medura and the defence

has never taken up the position that they were not arrested there or they were

at a different place. It has been determined further that no material prejudice

would be caused to the accused-appellants by amending the charge. Accordingly,

the charges have been amended, and after the amended charges were read over

to the appellants where they have pleaded not guilty, the learned High Court

Judge has allowed the accused-appellants to cross-examine the relevant

witnesses in that regard, if they find it necessary.

Having taken time to consider whether to cross-examine the relevant witnesses,

it has been informed to the Court by the learned Counsel who represented the

accused-appellants that it would not be necessary.

Thereafter, pronouncing his judgment on 30-07-2018, the learned High Court

Judge has found both the accused guilty of the 1st and the 2nd count.

Page 7 of 28

After having allowed the accused-appellants to make submissions in mitigation,

and allowing them to address the Court in terms of section 280 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act, the learned High Court Judge has pronounced death

sentence on both the accused-appellants.

It is against this conviction and the sentence that the accused-appellants have

preferred this appeal.

Before moving into the grounds of appeal urged, I would now briefly summarize

the evidence led before the trial Court.

Facts in Brief

PW-01 who was the Officer-in-Charge of the police team, which conducted this

raid. He was attached to the Police Narcotic Bureau (PNB) during the time

relevant to this detection.

On 23-01-2013, another officer attached to the PNB, namely PC-63501

Jayawardena, has received an information where he has informed the same to

PW-01 around 7.00 a.m. After inspecting the note made by the said PC-63501

in his field notebook and endorsing it, PW-01 has informed his Officer-in-Charge

and has organized the raid which led to the arrest of the appellants.

He has arranged for seven officials including the Police Constable who provided

the information to conduct the raid, and after following due procedure, PW-01

and his team has left the PNB at 8.00 a.m. in two vehicles. They have reached

the Horton Place roundabout and have parked the car and the cab in which they

were travelling near the fuel station situated at the roundabout. After being

informed of their position, the informant has come around 8.45 a.m. and had

met PW-01 and PC-63501.

The PW-01 in his evidence has stated that the information received by PC-63501

was to the effect that the Heroin trafficking transaction will take place near a

place called Mel Medura in Colombo 07, and a person called Baba who lives in

Maligawatta area will deal the transaction and he may have already left the

Page 8 of 28

Maligawatta area, and for them to wait nearby so that he can provide additional

information.

According to PW-01, it was with the said information that he and his team arrived

near the fuel station.

After having a discussion with the informant, PW-01 has informed the officials

who were in the cab to move away from that place and wait near the

Independence Square until further instructions. Thereafter, PW-01 and PC-

63501 has gotten into the car and had waited until 9.30 in the morning.

At that time, the informant had returned in his motorcycle and had instructed

them to move to the vehicle park situated in front of Mel Medura and had

informed that there is sufficient cover for them to wait discretely. Accordingly,

he and the officers who were in the car has moved to the mentioned car park

and had themselves stationed there.

At page 119 of the appeal brief, PW-01 explains how they were stationed at the

car park in the following manner.

.

.

It had been his evidence that the informant was also with them, and he observed

the main road meticulously while waiting near the main road.

There had been two other vehicles parked at the vehicle park at that time.

Around 10.15 in the morning, a three-wheeler has come and stopped in front of

Mel Medura and they have observed the person who drove the vehicle taking a

call. At that point, the informant has come hurriedly towards their vehicle and

had informed them that the person called Baba will come out from the house

situated at the right side of the car park and will come to the road.

Page 9 of 28

After a while, a person wearing a green-coloured t-shirt and a black and white

three-quarter trouser has come near the three-wheeler. After informing that it

was Baba, the informant has hidden himself in the vehicle park.

PW-01 has been very specific that the three-wheeler was parked about 5 6

meters away from their car and that they could observe very clearly what was

happening near the three-wheeler. They have observed that the person who came

near the three-wheeler taking a parcel out of his right-side pocket of the trouser

and handing it over to the person seated in the drivers seat of the three-wheeler.

At that point, PW-01, along with PC-63501 and PC-12810 has reached the three-

wheeler and had informed that they were from the PNB. PW-01 has observed

that the person inside the three-wheeler attempting to hide the parcel, but PW-

01 has taken charge of it. They have managed to prevent the person who was on

the road from escaping.

After that, PW-01 has opened the parcel and has realized that it contains

Diacetylmorphine or Heroin through his long years of experience as a PNB officer.

Accordingly, PW-01 has arrested the driver of the three-wheeler for possessing

and trafficking Heroin. He has identified him as the 1st accused-appellant.

After the arrest, he has instructed PC-12810 to search the other person and has

found Rs. 22,800/- in his possession. Accordingly, he has also been arrested on

the charge of trafficking and possessing of Heroin. PW-01 has identified the 2nd

accused-appellant as the said person.

After the arrest, he has got down the cab, and based on the information received

upon questioning the arrested suspects, he has searched two security huts

situated at No. 62, Horton Place, Colombo 07. He has come to know that the 2nd

suspect arrested was staying in the security huts. The house situated at No. 62

was unoccupied, and one Priyantha was the security guard in charge of the

house. PW-01 has recorded a statement from him in that regard. Based on the

questioning, the police team had gone to Maligawatta area looking for another

person, but have been unable to locate him.

Page 10 of 28

The suspects, along with the Heroin found, and the three-wheeler had been

taken to the PNB where the quantity of Heroin recovered had been weighed in

front of the suspects. It had been found that the said substance had a total

weight of 93 grams and 900 milligrams. Thereafter, PW-01 has taken due

procedural steps to seal the Heroin found and to handover the said production

along with the money, the three-wheeler, and other productions to the relevant

production officers.

At the trial, the witness has produced and marked the Heroin allegedly recovered

from the possession of the accused-appellants and other relevant productions.

When PW-01 was subjected to cross-examination by the defence, he has

maintained the initial position that their car was parked in such a manner that

the front of the car was facing the main road so that they can observe the road

properly. He has specifically replied to the suggestion that he was unable to see

what was happening in front of him that it was not so, and he and his team of

officers clearly observed the parcel being handed over by the 2nd accused-

appellant to the 1st accused-appellant.

He has also stated that when he saw the 2nd accused-appellant for the first time,

he was walking from the direction of Borella towards the three-wheeler, but did

not see from where he came to the road.

However, under constant cross-examination as to the way the vehicle was alleged

to have been parked in the car park of Mel Madura, PW-01 appears to have

changed his earlier stance in that regard.

At page 338 of the brief, he has stated as follows;

.

?

. .

. .

Page 11 of 28

. .

. . ,

.

. ,

. , .

.

. .

.

. ?

. . .

It appears that after realizing that the defence Counsel was well aware of the

geography of the location, the PW-01 has changed his earlier stand. Thereafter,

he has maintained the position that in fact, their vehicle was parked parallel to

the road that runs through Horton Place roundabout towards Borella. He has

admitted that when the vehicle was parked in such a manner, the person nearest

to the road would be the driver of the vehicle, and he was seated to the left side

of the driver.

This shows that the stand taken up throughout by the learned Counsel for the

accused was correct as to the alleged parking of the vehicle.

The witness has stated in his evidence that the three-wheeler came and parked

right in front of the car park. It is now clear that the building called Mel Medura

and its car park is located on the right side of the road when one travels from

Horton Place roundabout towards Borella. In the way the witness has given

evidence, it shows that the three-wheeler has come from the direction of Horton

Place roundabout towards Borella from the left-hand side of the road and had

crossed the road and parked it right in front of the car park, but on the main

road.

Page 12 of 28

At page 342 of the appeal brief, the witness has stated as follows;

. .

.

.

. .

. ?

. .

. ?

. .

It had been the position of the 1st accused-appellant that he was arrested around

9.30 p.m. on the night of 22-01-2013 when he arrived at No. 62, Horton Place

residence at the request of the 2nd accused-appellant who often used to obtain

his services as a three-wheeler driver.

It had been his position that after the arrest, he was severely assaulted,

blindfolded, and was kept at the same place until the following day and was

taken to the PNB along with the 2nd accused-appellant. It had been suggested by

him that no Heroin was found or no such raid was conducted in the manner

stated by PW-01, which the witness has denied saying that the raid was

conducted as stated, and the arrest was made.

The stand taken up by the 2nd accused-appellant had been similar to that of the

1st accused-appellant where he too has denied that he was arrested in the

manner as claimed by the witness.

Under cross-examination, changing his earlier stance, the PW-01 has stated

that he was seated in the front seat of the vehicle next to the driver of the vehicle

and he and his officials could very well see what was happening on the main

road.

Page 13 of 28

The witness who has given evidence at the trial to corroborate the evidence of

PW-01 has been PC-12810 Nahinna (PW-03).

It is noteworthy to mention that PC-63501 Jayawardena, the officer who

allegedly received the information, as well as a person who took part in the raid

right from the beginning until the end, has not been called as a witness.

PW-03 has given evidence as to the actions he and his team took to arrest the

accused-appellant. He has stated that after being informed by the informant to

come to the vehicle park of Mel Medura, the vehicle was stopped facing its front

side towards the Mel Medura. He has stated that once parked in that manner,

Horton Road can be seen from the right-hand side of the driver. Thereafter, he

has narrated what happened as stated by PW-01, and has stated that it was he

who detained the person who was on the road and searched him, where he

recovered money amounting to Rs. 22,800/- from his possession.

He has corroborated the PW-01 as to the steps they took after the arrest of the

appellants and the way the productions and the suspects were handed over to

relevant officials of the PNB and also the way the Heroin was weighed.

It appears that his evidence as to the way the car was parked was similar to the

stand of PW-01 when he admitted under cross-examination as to the way the

vehicle was parked and their positioning until the arrest was made.

In this action, the Government Analyst who analyzed the substance sent to the

Government Analyst Department has confirmed that the pure quantity of Heroin

found in the sample was 20.28 grams.

There had been no challenge as to the chain of custody of the productions and

the Officer-in-Charge of the production room of the PNB has given evidence in

that regard.

After the conclusion of the prosecution evidence and after having considered the

evidence placed before the Court, the learned High Court Judge has decided to

Page 14 of 28

call for a defence from both the appellants. Both of them have made dock

statements.

The 1st accused-appellant in his dock statement has stated that he worked as a

three-wheeler driver in a three-wheeler owned by a relative of the 2nd accused,

and he used to take family members of 2nd accused on various hires frequently.

It was his stand that he received a call from the 2nd accused appellant on 22-01-

2013 to come to a house in Horton place and he reached the said house around

7.40 p.m. in the night. He has met the 2nd accused appellant and had seen two

male friends of him and two other females in the house. It had been his position

that the 2nd accused appellant gave him money and informed him to go and bring

meals, a bottle of arrack and cigarettes. The 1st accused appellant had gone with

one of the persons named Ajith, who were in the house, and when he returned

after purchasing the stuff the 1st accused wanted him to bring, some persons

detained him near the gate of the house, blindfolded and assaulted him. After

some time, they have removed his cover and he has seen the persons who were

inside the house when he left it, were also detained.

According to him, they were kept there until the next morning, namely 23-01-

2013, and the two friends of the 2nd accused and the two females had been

released. The 1st accused-appellant and the 2nd accused-appellant were kept

inside the house until the evening, and they were taken to Maligawatta area, and

thereafter taken to the PNB. At the PNB, a statement was recorded from him and

he was produced at the Maligakanda Magistrates Court on the following day.

He has denied the evidence of PW-01 and 03 that they were arrested in the

manner the witnesses claimed and had stated that these are completely

fabricated charges against them.

The dock statement of the 2nd accused-appellant had been that he has worked

in Dubai since 2006 and upon returning to the country in 2010, went to Oman

and worked there. During the time relevant to this incident, he was in Sri Lanka

after returning from Oman, and during that period, he had issues in his family

Page 15 of 28

life. Since there was a dispute with his wife that arose on January 17th or 18th,

he left his house and went to live with a friend named Priyantha, who was looking

after a house situated in Horton Place. He stayed there for a few days and on

22nd January, his friend Priyantha went on leave and his assistant Ajith was the

person who was in charge of the house, which was an unoccupied old house.

In the evening of 22nd January, he organized a party in the house and two of his

friends and two females came to the house. Thereafter, he phoned the 1st

accused-appellant and instructed him to bring some food. About 15 minutes

after the 1st accused-appellant left with Ajith, some persons came and detained

them.

The persons who came questioned him as to who lives in Maligawatta, and he

stated that he is the one who is living in Maligawatta. They questioned him about

one Faizer, to which he informed that he is unaware of such a person. By that

time, all of them were blindfolded and in about 45 minutes time, he heard the

three-wheeler returning.

After sometime, their blindfolds were removed, and kept them handcuffed until

the next morning.

On the following day, his two friends and the two females were released and the

appellants were taken to Maligawatta area, and from there, to the PNB. He has

claimed that no money was recovered from his possession and the money was

recovered from his purse, which was inside the travelling bag that he brought to

the house when he came there after his dispute with his wife. He has claimed

that no Heroin was recovered and the version of events narrated by the

prosecution witnesses is a complete fabrication against them.

The Grounds of Appeal

At the hearing of this appeal, the learned Presidents Counsel who represented

the 1st accused-appellant urged the following grounds of appeal for the

consideration of the Court.

Page 16 of 28

1. The several amendments to the indictment turning the course of the

trial to a different direction has caused prejudice to the 1st accused-

appellant.

2. The learned High Court Judge failed to appreciate that the prosecution

deliberately refrained from calling PC-63501 Jayawardena (PW-04) who

allegedly received the information.

3. The learned High Court Judge failed to consider several items of

evidence, which caused a reasonable doubt as to the case of the

prosecution.

4. The learned High Court Judge failed to appreciate that in view of the

defence taken in the case that the arrest did not take place on 23-01-

2013 but on 22-01-2013, the evidence gives credence to the defence

position.

5. The learned High Court Judge failed to consider that PW-01 and PW-

03 who gave evidence as main witnesses are suspects in a murder case

over a death occurred at the PNB, which should have been considered

in relation to their credibility.

6. The learned High Court Judge failed in his duty by determining that

PW-01 and PW-03 as truthful witnesses prior to considering the

defence evidence and thereby misdirected in law.

The learned Counsel for the 2nd appellant informed the Court that he will be

relying on the grounds of appeal urged by the learned Presidents Counsel on

behalf of the 1st accused-appellant

Consideration of the Grounds of Appeal

Since the grounds of appeal urged by the learned Counsel mainly revolves

around the question of probability of the story narrated by the prosecution

witnesses as to the manner in which they have allegedly conducted the raid and

arrested the accused- appellants, I find it appropriate to consider the test of

Page 17 of 28

probability before deciding to consider other grounds of appeal in detail, if

necessary.

However, as the 1st ground of appeal is on the basis that the manner in which

the indictment was amended several times causing prejudice to the accused-

appellants, I would like to comment on that matter before proceeding to consider

the question of probability.

This is a matter where the initial indictment had three counts. The 1st and the

2nd count were against the 1st accused on the basis that he possessed and

trafficked Heroin on 23-01-2013 at Maligawatta, and the 3rd count had been

against the 2nd accused on the basis that he aided and abetted the 1st accused

to commit the offences mentioned in the 1st and the 2nd count.

After the conclusion of the evidence-in-chief of PW-01 who was the main witness,

the prosecution has made the first amendment to the indictment to include the

2nd accused as well in relation to the 1st and the 2nd count, apparently on the

basis that they jointly possessed and trafficked Heroin. Accordingly, the 3rd

charge had been dropped against the 2nd accused.

It was only at a very later stage of the trial, the prosecution has realized that

though the indictment was amended on the basis that both the accused

committed the crime, in fact, the two amended charges specifically refer to the

1st accused, even though it has been changed to be read as .

I find that these two amendments are substantial amendments to the indictment

effected after the prosecution evidence in that regard had been concluded to suit

the evidence led at the trial. The 3rd amendment has been made after the matter

was set for judgment by the learned High Court Judge.

It appears that in their submissions before the High Court at the conclusion of

the trial, the appellants have taken up the position that in the indictment, the

charges against them were on the basis that they committed the crime in

Page 18 of 28

Maligawatta, whereas the evidence led before the High Court did not support

such a position.

The proceedings on 10-07-2018, where the matter was set for judgment

originally clearly show that the above-mentioned fact had been discovered only

at the stage of preparing the judgment and that was also because of the stand

taken up by the appellants in their written submissions.

The relevant note made by the learned High Court Judge as I have stated earlier

clearly shows that the prosecution had been unaware about the material failure

in the charges as to the place of the offence. It was only after being made aware

of this fact, the prosecution had made an application to amend the indictment

again, to suit the evidence led before the Court by replacing the place of the

offence as Horton Place, Colombo 07.

The learned High Court Judge in his order in that regard has determined that,

since the appellants have not taken up a position that they were not arrested at

Horton Place and the cross-examination has also been on the same basis, there

is nothing to determine that the appellants will be prejudiced or their defence

would be affected by allowing an amendment of this nature and hence, the

amendment has been allowed.

The section under which the Court may alter the charge or charges is section

167 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979. In the Code of Criminal

Procedure Ordinance No. 15 of 1898, the corresponding section was section 172.

The relevant section 167 reads as follows;

167. (1) Any Court may alter any indictment or charge at any time

before judgement is pronounced or, in the case of trials before the

High Court by a jury, before the verdict of the juries return.

(2) Every such alteration shall be read and explained to the accused.

Page 19 of 28

(3) The substitution of one charge for another in an indictment or the

addition of a new charge to an indictment and in a Magistrates Court

the substitution of one charge for another or the addition of a new

charge shall be deemed to be an alteration of such indictment or

charge within the meaning of this section.

The above-mentioned section 167 clearly provides for an amendment to the

charge before the judgment is pronounced. It also provides that it is up to the

Court to decide on that depending on the relevant facts and circumstances since

the words used had been any Court may alter.

Since the learned High Court Judge has allowed the amendment in terms of

section 167 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, and has also given reasons

for using his discretion, I will not proceed to comment any further on the matter.

However, I would like to cite the judgment of Nagalingam J. in the case of John

Perera Vs. Weerasinghe 53 NLR 158 referred by the learned Deputy Solicitor

General (DSG) in his submissions before this Court, which I find would be of

use.

This was a case where the complainant moved to amend the charges filed before

the learned Magistrate of Gampaha in terms of section 172 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Ordinance 1898 that was in existence then. The learned

Magistrate has refused the application. The application has been made to the

learned Magistrate before the trial proper has commenced.

It was held on appeal that,

The prosecutor has been careless and negligent to the extreme that there

can be little doubt. The question, however, is whether the learned Magistrate

was right in refusing to accede to the application to amend the charges. No

reasons have been given, except that the defence strongly objects to the

amendment. Under section 172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, power is

vested in a Court to alter a charge at any time before judgment is

Page 20 of 28

pronounced. There can be little doubt that this is a discretionary power that

is vested in the Court, but such a discretion must be exercised judicially.

Had the learned Magistrate given any reasons save that the defence

strongly objects, it would have been possible to test whether the discretion

has in fact been properly exercised. In the present state of the record, it is

not possible to do so, and I have to consider the question anew.

The principle underlying the grant or refusal of an application to amend was

laid down in a very early judgement of this Court in the case of The Queen

Vs. Sinno Appu 1 (7 S.C.C. 51) in which Fleming, A.C.J. laid down the

proposition that an amendment should not be refused by the Judge unless

it is likely to do substantial injustice to an accused. In the same case Lawrie,

J. expressed the view that the Judge should be ready to listen to and

willing to adopt any amendment which will have the effect of convicting the

guilty or of acquitting the innocent. I have had no arguments addressed to

me on behalf of the respondent to indicate that any substantial injustice or

prejudice other than legitimate is likely to be caused to him by reason of the

amendment being allowed. Furthermore, when I consider that the charges

relate to the commission of offences by a person holding public office, I am

less reluctant to refuse the amendment.

The above citation clearly shows that although section 167 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act provide for an amendment for the charge at any time

before the judgment, it is a privilege that should be allowed depending on the

facts and the circumstances of the case, and it should not cause any prejudice

to the accused person or should not amount to denying a fair trial towards such

a person.

It is abundantly clear that the initial intention of the Hon. Attorney General when

drafting the indictment had been to indict the 1st accused-appellant for

possessing and trafficking of Heroin and the 2nd accused-appellant for aiding

and abetting. It becomes clear that the indictment had been later amended

Page 21 of 28

changing the complexion of the indictment. In the manner the three

amendments had been sought, it clearly establishes the fact that the prosecution

had been conducted in a careless manner, which has resulted in amendments

at several stages of the trial.

I observe negligence of the highest order by the prosecution throughout the trial

as a result of the unawareness of the defects of the indictment. I am of the view

that when exercising the discretion granted in terms of section 167 of the Code

of Criminal Procedure Act, trial Judges should draw their attention to the

relevant aspects, the facts and the circumstances, in order to make sure that

carelessness and negligence should not be rewarded in a trial at the stage of

pronouncing of the judgment.

Be that as it may, since the main arguments presented in this appeal were on

the question of probability, I will now proceed to consider whether the story

narrated by the prosecution witnesses as to the conduct of the raid and the arrest

of the appellants can be considered cogent enough and probable, as decided by

the learned High Court Judge, or whether it has created a reasonable doubt as

to the incident, which should have been considered in favour of the accused-

appellants.

It is settled law that in a criminal case, an accused person has no obligations

and it is the prosecution who should prove their case beyond reasonable doubt

against the accused. The prosecution cannot rely on the weaknesses of the

defence, and any fact, which favours the version of the accused and also favours

the version of the prosecution should be considered in favour of the accused.

At this juncture, I am also reminded of the judicial decision of Martin Singho

Vs. Queen 69 CLW 21 where it was held;

Even if the jury declines to believe the appellants version, he was yet

entitled to be acquitted on the charge if his version raised in their mind a

reasonable doubt as to the truth of the prosecution case.

Page 22 of 28

In the case of SC Appeal No. 99/2007 decided on 30.07.2009, it was held:

What needs consideration now is when the evidence led for the prosecution

in this case is closely scrutinized, whether it could be satisfied that

prosecution had discharged the burden of proving the case beyond

reasonable doubt. If not, the Appellant is liable to be acquitted of the

charges. The prosecution must stand or fall on its own legs and it cannot

derive any strength from the weakness in the defence, and when the guilt

of the accused is not established beyond reasonable doubt, he is liable to

be acquitted as a matter of right and not as matter of grace or favour.

In the case of Alim Vs. Wijesinghe (S.I. Police, Batticaloa) 38 CLW 95, it was

held that,

Where the same facts are capable of an inference in favour of the accused

and also an inference against him, the inference consistent with the

accuseds innocence should be preferred.

It is well-settled law that if the accused decides to make a dock statement when

called for a defence, even such a dock statement has to be considered as a form

of an evidence subjected to the infirmities it carries due to the fact that it was

not evidence given under oath or subjected to the test of cross-examination.

In the case of Queen Vs. Kularatne (1968) 71 NLR 529, it was held that while

jurors must be informed that such a statement must be looked upon as evidence

subjected however to the infirmities that the accuseds statement is not made

under oath and not subjected to cross-examination.

Held further;

1. If the dock statement is believed, it must be acted upon to,

2. If it raised a reasonable doubt in their minds about the case of the

prosecution, the defence must succeed and;

3. It must not be used against another accused.

Page 23 of 28

It was held in the case of Don Samantha Jude Anthony Jayamaha Vs. The

Attorney General, C.A. 303/2006 decided on 11-07-2012 that,

Whether the witness of the defence or the dock statement is sufficient to

create a doubt cannot be decided in vacuum or in isolation, because it needs

to be considered in the totality of evidence, that is in the light of the evidence

for the prosecution as well as the defence.

It is trite law that in a criminal case, a trial Judge has to consider prosecution

as well as defence evidence in its totality without compartmentalizing it.

Our Superior Courts have consistently laid emphasis on the duty to consider

the evidence as a whole, irrespective of whether the trial was held before a jury

or Judge. In the case of The King Vs. Appuhamy 37 NLR 281, it was stated

that "One has to look at the whole case". A similar approach was adopted by the

Court of Criminal Appeal in King Vs. Buckley 43 NLR 474, which imposed a

duty on the jurors that they should view the evidence as a whole. The judgments

of King Vs. De Silva 41 NLR 337, King Vs. Perera 41 NLR 389, and The

Queen Vs. Abadda 66 NLR 397 had adopted a similar view.

In James Silva Vs. Republic of Sri Lanka (1980) 2 Sri L.R. 167, it was clearly

stated that;

"A satisfactory way to arrive at a verdict of guilt or innocence is to consider

all the matters before the Court adduced whether by the prosecution or by

the defence in its totality without compartmentalizing and, ask himself

whether as a prudent man, in the circumstances of the particular case, he

believes the accused guilty of the charge or not guilty."

With the above legal principles in mind, I will now consider whether the

prosecution evidence has passed the test of probability and whether there can

be any justification in the manner the learned High Court Judge analyzed the

relevant issues in favour of the prosecution version of events.

Page 24 of 28

PW-01 in his evidence in chief has given specific evidence to say that he and the

other officers who were in the car, came and parked their vehicle in the car park

of Mel Madura in a way that the front side of the vehicle was facing the main

road. This suggests that PW-01 who was in the front seat of the vehicle from the

left-hand side of the driver, and the other officers who were inside the vehicle

could very clearly see what was happening on the main road in front of them.

If that could be believed, the trial Court could safely assume that PW-01 and the

other officer who gave evidence had a clear view of the road so that what they

say as to what unfolded before them could also be believed.

However, under cross-examination and under constant questioning as to the

geography of the car park, PW-01 has completely changed his position to say

that the vehicle was parked parallel to the main road in the car park of Mel

Medura and it was the driver of the vehicle who was nearest to the road, and

since he was seated next to the driver from the left side of him, he had to look at

the road by turning and through the drivers side glass of the door. I am of the

view that this creates a grave doubt as to the truthfulness of the utterances of

PW-01 and also the subsequent evidence of PW-02 who has spoken in line with

the subsequent evidence of PW-01 stating that their vehicle was parked parallel

to the road.

In that context, it appears that if the vehicle was parked parallel to the road and

the front side of the car was facing the Mel Madura building, the car park

entrance being a narrow entrance, the view of the main road that can be obtained

from such a position would not be a wide view of the main road.

The evidence of the PW-01 had been that the three-wheeler which came from the

direction of Horton Place roundabout towards Borella from the left-hand side of

the road turned towards the right-hand side of the road and parked the vehicle

right in front of the entrance to the car park, and he observed that the driver was

taking a call to someone.

Page 25 of 28

I find it hard to believe that in a busy road like this, where vehicles travel both

ways, and vehicle parking is not allowed on the road, a drug trafficker who comes

from the correct side of the road, would come across the road and park his

vehicle in a manner anyone can see it as parked facing the towards the wrong

direction of the road. He could have easily stopped the vehicle on the correct side

of the road which belongs to him, and make the call if he so wishes, without

attracting undue attention from anyone. I find that it is quite probable that by

saying that the 1st appellant came across the road and parked the vehicle just in

front of the entrance to Mel Medura, the prosecution witnesses are attempting

to show that they were able to clearly observe what he was doing at a close range.

I find that the probability of such a thing not happening is more towards the

version of events as narrated by the defence at the trial.

Another matter that needs attention is the evidence where PW-01 says that the

informant who was with them waited in the main road about 5-6 meters away

from their car expecting the arrival of the 2nd accused named Baba. It was his

evidence that after the three-wheeler came and parked near the entrance, which

obviously should be near the place where the informant was looking at the road,

he came near the car and identified the person who came near the three-wheeler

as Baba and discretely left the place.

This is an incident alleged to have happened in the broad day light according to

the evidence of prosecution witnesses. If the informant was stationed in the

manner the prosecution witnesses say, it would have exposed him to the driver

of the three-wheeler, who was the 1st accused-appellant, as well as the person

who allegedly came near the vehicle, namely the 2nd accused-appellant.

There is a high possibility that either both of them or one of them could see the

informant while standing near the main road or even talking to the persons in

the car. It clearly appears that the informant was a person well known at least

to the 2nd accused-appellant whom he has referred to as Baba and provided the

Page 26 of 28

information that he is the person carrying the Heroin and coming from

Maligawatta area.

It is highly improbable to believe that an informant who provides regular

information to PNB would take such a risk to expose himself in the manner the

witnesses claim, knowing very well the dangerous consequences he will have to

face if the drug traffickers come to know that he is a police informant.

Another matter that needs attention is the information that is alleged to have

been provided by the informant. According to PW-01, the information had been

to the effect that a person called Baba, who has been later identified as the 2nd

accused-appellant would be bringing Heroin to be delivered near a place in

Horton Place. The prosecution witnesses have waited for a considerable period

of time near the fuel station at the junction expecting further information from

the informant.

The evidence had been to the effect that the informant came in his motorbike

and spoke with the witnesses. Subsequently, it had been stated that the

informant came again and informed that the 2nd accused-appellant will be

coming out from a building nearby to make the delivery. It shows that the 2nd

appellant had been inside the building as stated by the informant. If the initial

information had been to the effect that the 2nd accused is going to leave

Maligawatta area to deliver Heroin and the informant was on the lookout for his

whereabouts, what was the reason for the informant to fail to notice that the 2nd

accused-appellant came and went inside the house or how he came to know that

the 2nd accused-appellant was already inside the house, are questions that need

to be considered.

The consistent stand taken up by the appellants had been that they were

arrested while being inside the house No.62, Horton Place on the night of the

previous day, namely 22-01-2013, and were held in detention at the house until

the next day. It had been the position of the appellants that the other persons

with them were released and both of them were detained after questioning about

Page 27 of 28

a person called Faizer, and that they were later taken to PNB where the drugs

were introduced to them.

The 2nd accused-appellant has explained the alleged recovery of money from his

possession stating that it was recovered not in the manner stated by the

witnesses, but from his travelling bag, which he took to the house when he came

there few days before the incident to stay with the watcher of the house.

As I have stated before, the evidence led in a case has to be taken in its totality,

including the stand of the defence. I am not in a position to agree with the learned

High Court Judges observation that several persons including the raiding party

could not have stayed in a security hut of the house overnight and the version

of events as narrated by the accused-appellants in their dock statements cannot

be believed and is a concocted story. I am also unable to agree with the analysis

of the evidence by the learned High Court Judge to justify the prosecution

evidence as to the improbability factors of the version of events narrated by the

prosecution witnesses.

I am of the view that if taken in the correct perspective, there was ample basis

to conclude that the evidence of the prosecution has not passed the test of

probability and was not cogent enough to determine that the prosecution has

proved the case beyond reasonable doubt against the accused-appellants.

I find that, if taken as a whole, the version of events as taken up by the appellants

at the trial are more probable than that of the evidence of the prosecution, which

should be a factor that should have been considered in favour of the appellants.

I am of the view that this was a case where there was a reasonable doubt as to

the evidence narrated by the prosecution, where such a reasonable doubt should

have been held in favour of the accused-appellants.

For the reasons as considered above, I find that this is a conviction and a

sentence that cannot be allowed to stand. I am of the view that considering the

Page 28 of 28

remaining grounds of appeal would not be necessary, as the appeal should

succeed on the considered ground of appeal alone.

Accordingly, I set aside the conviction and the sentence dated 30-07-2018

pronounced by the learned High Court Judge of Colombo and acquit the two

accused-appellants from the charges preferred against them.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal