==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0175/2024

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under and in

terms of section 331(1) of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979

as amended read with Article 138(1) of

the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka

Vs

Gamage Thilak Pushpa Kumara

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Gamage Thilak Pushpa Kumara

Accused-appellant

Vs

Hon. Attorney General Attorney General’s Department Colombo 12.

Respondent

High Court Case No:

HC/463/2018

Court of Appeal Case No:

CA/HCC/175/24

CA/HCC/0175/2024

2 | P a g e

Before : P. Kumaratnam, J.

Pradeep Hettiarachchi, J.

Counsel : Hafeel Farisz with Shanon Fernando for the Accused-Appellant

Akila Dalpadatu S.C. for the Respondents

Argued on : 10.09.2025

Decided on : 02.12.2025

Pradeep Hettiarachchi, J

Judgment

1. The Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as “the Appellant”) was indicted for the

possession and trafficking of 8.31 grams of Heroin, offences punishable under sections 54

A(d) and 54A(b) of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended by

Act No. 13 of 1984.

2. The trial commenced in the High Court of Colombo, and at the conclusion of the trial, the

learned High Court Judge found the Appellant guilty of the charges. Consequently, the

Appellant was convicted and sentenced to life imprisonment. It is against this conviction

and the sentence the Appellant has lodged the present appeal. The following grounds of

appeal are advanced by the Appellant;

(a) The learned High Court Judge has failed to consider that the version of the

prosecution is improbable;

(b) The learned High Court Judge has failed to analyze contradictions per se in the

prosecution’s version;

(c) The learned High Court Judge failed to consider that there was no evidence

whatsoever to prove that the Appellant intended on trafficking the purported

Diacetylmorphine;

CA/HCC/0175/2024

3 | P a g e

(d) The learned High Court Judge failed to consider the contradictions between PW1

and PW2 inter alia pertaining to the purported “exclusive possession” of

Diacetylmorphine found from the Appellant;

(e) Contradictions in the version of the prosecution on the chain of productions were

not considered;

(f) The learned High Court Judge failed to give any analysis as to the version of the

Defense;

(g) The learned High Court Judge failed to analyze that there was a significant

discrepancy in the weight of the Diacetylmorphine purportedly weighed by the

police officers of the Mattakkuliya and the Government Analyst of the

Government Analyst Department.

3. Following witnesses testified on behalf of the prosecution;

PW1- Sub Inspector of the Mattakkkuliya Police Station, Sinhala Irdudipathige

Rohana Jayampathi

PW2- Police Sergeant Jayantha Deepal (48876)

PW5- Police Constable Ponnamperuma Arachchilage Asanka Harrol

PW6- Kasaduruge Chandana Pushpakumara Perera

PW7- Police Sergeant Hewa Pawallage Sumith Jayantha (51873)

PW8- Police Constable Lalith Saumya Dasanayake (75077)

PW11- Senior Assistant Government Analyst, Merrinage Ayesha Jayamali Fernando

4. After the close of the prosecution case, the Appellant made a dock statement and

proceeded to call DW1, Bandara Dewata Gedera, a retired Chief Inspector of Police

served in the Mattakkuliya Police Station to give evidence.

5. According to PW1, on 01-05-2017, he was on patrol with another three police officers in

the Mattakkuliya Summitpura area, all dressed in civil attire. While walking along the

Summitpura road he has seen the Appellant standing at the beginning of the Summitpura

C Lane. According to PW1, upon seeing the four police officers who were in civil attire,

the Appellant appeared visibly alarmed, changed the course of his journey, and in visible

distress, put his hand into the pocket in his trouser. Thereafter, upon noticing the change

in his behavior, PW1 had gone and apprehended the Appellant. According to PW1, he has

taken the right hand of the Appellant out of the pocket and checked. Holding tightly in his

CA/HCC/0175/2024

4 | P a g e

right hand was a white color cellophane bag which contained a brown color substance

similar to Heroin. The other officers were also nearby when aforesaid incident took place.

6. He has arrested the Appellant at around 2.00 pm and taken into his custody the Heroin

that was recovered from the possession of the Appellant. Thereafter, he has proceeded to

the Modara Police Station with PW2 and the Appellant in a three wheeler. At the Modara

Police Station, PW1 has weighed the cellophane bag containing Heroin, sealed it and

taken the finger prints of the Appellant. According to PW1, weighing and sealing of the

productions were done in front of the Appellant. The gross weight of the cellophane bag

containing Heroin was 19 grams.

7. PW1 and his team of officers had come to the Mattakkuliya police station at around 4.00

pm on the same day and upon arrival, PW1 has handed over the sealed productions

bearing the finger prints of the Appellants to PW5. At the trial, PW1 identified the

productions.

8. It was contended by the Counsel for the Appellant that the prosecution’s version of events

regarding the manner in which the arrest took place was highly improbable. Upon cross

examination, PW1 stated that they saw the Appellant about 500m away and the Appellant

started acting in a suspicious manner, when he saw them. It was also stated that the

Appellant started to walk towards Summitpura C Lane when the police officers were

about 20-30 meters away from the Appellant and the Appellant did not make any attempt

to run away.

9. It is my opinion that if the Appellant was a seasoned criminal who was into drug

trafficking business, it is very likely that he would be on alert as to what is happening

around, for they are aware of the disastrous consequences that they might have to face, if

get caught by the law enforcement officers. In fact, it was stated by the PW1 that although

the police officers were in civil attire, the Appellant, nevertheless, appeared to have

recognized them which made him panic. Therefore, version of PW1 and PW2 that the

Appellant did not make any attempt to escape even after noticing the presence of the

police officers and instead put his right hand into the pocket of his trouser thereby making

it more obvious to the police officers that he was concealing something seems highly

improbable.

CA/HCC/0175/2024

5 | P a g e

10. Moreover, the evidence of PW2 indicates that the appellant was known to them prior to

the arrest. If that were the case, it is highly unlikely that the appellant would not have

attempted to escape upon seeing the police officers. Further, according to PW2, the

appellant was taken to the Modera Police Station by a three-wheeler, yet not even the

registration number of the three-wheeler has been noted. This omission further casts

doubt on the credibility and probability of the prosecution’s version of the arrest.

11. Furthermore, when testifying PW1 stated that he has conducted nearly 300 raids,

indicating that he is a seasoned officer with substantial experience in handling drug-

related cases. Despite this, when questioned by the Defense Counsel during cross

examination as to whether he did any background inquiry to verify the address and the

name of the Appellant, PW1 conceded that he did not do any such inquiry at the time of

arrest. He stated that he did not check the identity card of the Appellant. Nor did he go to

inspect the house of the Appellant that was located in the same area. When questioned,

PW1 explained that they did not do any search due to the fear that it might cause some

chaos and attract unwanted public attention to the arrest.

12. Moreover, it is important to note that, PW1 never made any note explaining the reason as

to why he failed to examine the identity card or inspect the residence of the Appellant. It

is my considered view that this behavior of PW1 is atypical of a seasoned police officer

who has dealt with similar cases and further casts serious doubts on the prosecution’s

version regarding the manner in which the arrest was made.

13. Another critical piece of information that this Court should not lightly disregard is the

inability of PW2 to identify the productions at the trial before the High Court. It is

significant to note that, PW2 accompanied PW1 throughout the incident. However, when

asked by both the learned State Counsel and the Defense Counsel whether he could

identify the productions, PW2 responded in the negative.

Vide Page 120 (Evidence in Chief)

ප්රe : ඔය දිනයේදී භාරයට ගත්ත නඩු භාණ්ඩ හඳුනා ගැනීයේ හැකියාවක්

තියෙනවද මහත්මයා?

උ : නඩු භාණ්ඩ හඳුනා ගැනීයේ හැකියාවක් මට නැහැ.

CA/HCC/0175/2024

6 | P a g e

Vide Page 133 (Cross Examination)

ප්රe : දැන් තමා යේ අධිකරණයේ රජයේ නීතීඥතුමිය ගරු අධිකරණයේ

විනිශ්චයකාරතුමා ඉදිරියේ අහන යකොට කිව්වා නඩු භාණ්ඩ හඳුනාගන්න ෙෑ

කියලා.

උ : එයහමයි.

ප්රe : එතයකොට ඔය මහත්මයා නඩු භාණ්ඩ දැක්යකම නැද්ද?

උ : නඩු භාණ්ඩ දුටුවා.

Vide Page 134 (Cross Examination)

ප්රe : ......අවුරුදු 4ක් ගියාම ගුලිය අඳුර ගන්න ෙැරි තරේ අමතක වීමක් වුනාද

මහත්මයාට?

උ : සියයට සියයක් හඳුනා ගැනීයේ හැකියාවක් නෑ.

ප්රe : අඳුරගන්න ෙෑ

උ : සීයට සීයක් හඳුනා ගැනීයේ හැකියාවක් නෑ.

ප්රe : ෙැහැයි කියන එකයන්?

උ : ෙැහැයි කියන එක යනයවයි. හඳුනා ගැනීයේ හැකියාවක් මට යේ අවස්ථායව්දී

නෑ.

ප්රe : යමවැනි ආකාරයේ වැටලීමක් යවලා නෑ. ඒ නිසා තමාට ඒවා අඳුරගන්න

ෙැහැ කියලා යයෝජනා කරනවා තමාට?

උ : යමවැනි ආකාරයේ වැටලීමක් සිදුවුණා. යේ අවස්ථායව්දී හඳුනාගැනීයේ

හැකියාවක් මා සතුව නෑ

14. In Iswari Prasad v. Mohamed Isa 1963 AIR (SC) 1728 at 1734 it was held that;

“In considering the question as to whether evidence given by the witness should be

accepted or not, the court has, no doubt, to examine whether the witness is, an

interested witness and to enquire whether the story deposed to by him is probable and

whether it has been shaken in cross-examination. That is whether there is a ring of

truth surrounding his testimony.”

15. The aforementioned facts would certainly make the prosecution’s version improbable and

hard to believe. At the same time, it is desirable to emphasize that, in a criminal trial, the

Court has a duty to evaluate and assess the credibility and probability of the evidence of

CA/HCC/0175/2024

7 | P a g e

official witnesses irrespective of their accuracy and consistency. It is incumbent on the

trial judge to examine and evaluate their evidence, especially the probability of the

prosecution’s narration of events since in drug cases probability of the prosecution’s

version of events is often challenged by the defense. Therefore, it is quite unfortunate that

these facts have escaped the attention of the learned High Court Judge.

16. The learned Counsel for the Appellant also contended that there exist several inter se

contradictions between the versions of PW1 and PW2 which go to the root of the case.

17. For instance, PW1, when testifying stated that he took the right hand of the Appellant out

of the pocket of the trouser and found out that the Appellant was clasping tightly in his

hand a cellophane bag that contained Heroin. The relevant portion of PW1’s evidence is

produced below;

Vide Page 50, Evidence in Chief

උ : පසුව මා හා ස්ථානයට යගොස් එම පුද්ගලයා අල්ලා ගත්තා ස්වාමීනි.

අල්ලායගන ඔහුයේ දකුණු අත ඉවතට යගන මා පරීක්ෂා කිරීයේ දී ඔහුයේ

අයතහි මිට යමොළවායගන සිටි සුදු පැහැති යසයලෝයේන් කවරයක දමා

ගැටගැසූ කුඩු වැනි යමක් අඩංගු පාර්සලයක් හමුවුණා ස්වාමීනි.

ප්රe : ඒ කියන්යන් ඔෙ දකුණු අත ඉවත් කරලා ඒ කියන්යන් පිටතට ගත්තා කියලා

කිව්වායන් ?

උ : එයහමයි ස්වාමීනී.

ප්රe : ඒ පිටතට ගන්න අවස්ථායව්දි දකුණු අත තිබ්යබ් යකොයි ආකාරයටද ?

උ : දකුණු අයත් සාක්කුයව් මිට යමොලවායගන හිටියේ ස්වාමීනී.

ප්රe : ඒ කියන්යන් කලිසයේ දකුණු සාක්කුවක මිටි යමොලවායගන තමයි හිටියේ ?

උ : එයහමයි ස්වාමීනී.

Vide Page 78-79, Cross Examination

ප්රe : අල්ල ගත්ත යවලායව්ත් දකුණු අත සාක්කුයව් තිබුයණ්?

උ : මා විසින් සාක්කුයවන් එළියට දකුණු අත ගත්තා.

ප්රe : ඔය අත එළියට ගන්න යවලායව් තමයි ඔය පාර්සලය අයත් තිබුයණ්?

උ : අත මිට යමොළවායගන සිටියේ ස්වාමීණි.

ප්රe : සාක්කුව ඇතුයළේ යනයමයි තිබුයණ්?

උ : අත මිට යමොළවායගන සාක්කුව ඇතුළට දමායගන සිටියේ ස්වාමීණි.

CA/HCC/0175/2024

8 | P a g e

එයහේමම මම තමයි එළියට ගත්යත් ස්වාමීණි.

ප්රe : මහත්මයා දකුණු අතින් ඇඳලා එළියට ගන්නයකොටත් අත මිටයමොළවායගන

තමයි විත්තිකාරයා සිටියේ ?

උ : එයහමයි ස්වාමීණි.

ප්රe : සාක්කුවට දායගන තිබුයණ් නැහැ?

උ : අත සාක්කුවට දමායගන සිටියේ ස්වාමීණි.

ප්රe : නැහැ, මම අහන්යන් පාර්සලය සාක්කුවට දාලා තිබුයණ් නැහැ?

උ : නැහැ ස්වාමීණි.

ප්රe : ඒ විදියටම අත ගුලි කරයගන සිටියේ?

උ : එයහමයි ස්වාමීණි.

18. However, contradicting the version of PW1, PW2 stated that the Appellant put his hand

into the pocket of the trouser after seeing them and they checked the Appellant’s pockets.

The relevant portion of PW2’s evidence is produced below;

Vide Page 112- 113, Evidence in Chief

ප්රe : දැන් යේ සුරුවම ආසන්නයට යනයකොට යේ නිලධාරීන් කණ්ඩායම යේකිසි

යදයක් නිරීක්ෂණය කළාද මහත්මයා?

උ : නිරීක්ෂණය කළා. ේ රථමයයන් ගමන් කයළේ කණ්ඩායේ භාර නිලධාරියා.

යදවනුව මමත් ගමන් කලා. ඒ අවස්ථායව්දී අප යදසට පැමිණි පුද්ගලයයකු

සුවරුම අසල ඉඳලා තැතිගත් ස්වභාවයකින් අප මග හැර යෑමට උත්සාහ

කරන ෙවත්, ඔහුයේ අයත් තිබී යමක් කලිසයේ දකුණු සාක්කුවට දමාගන්නා

ෙවත් නිරීක්ෂණය වුණා.

19. In this regard, it is pertinent to note that, despite the contradictions that exist between the

evidence of PW1 and PW2, the notes taken by both PW1 and PW2 seems strikingly

similar in content. Both PW1 and PW2 in their notes have stated that, PW1 took the

Appellant’s right hand out from the pocket of his trouser and found out that the Appellant

was holding tightly in his right hand a cellophane bag containing Heroine.

20. However, despite such similarities in the notes, PW1 and PW2 have contradicted each

other whilst giving evidence. Also, considering the similarity that exists between the

CA/HCC/0175/2024

9 | P a g e

notes taken by both PW1 and PW2, the only possible inference that could be drawn is that

they did not take notes independently, but copied from the other person’s notes.

21. It is noteworthy that according to PW2, it was PW1 who searched the appellant and

recovered the parcel of Heroin from the appellant’s pocket, which totally contradicts the

evidence of PW1. In my view, this is a vital contradiction that goes to the root of the

matter, as the charge against the appellant is primarily based on the alleged recovery of

Heroin from his possession. When the two officers who participated in the raid provide

two entirely contradictory versions as to the manner in which the parcel of Heroin was

recovered from the appellant, the very foundation of the prosecution case is irreparably

shaken. Regrettably, this vital contradiction appears to have escaped the attention of the

learned High Court Judge.

22. Furthermore, according to PW1, sealing equipment was with PW2. However, PW2, upon

cross examination stated that the sealing equipment was with PW1 and he never did

mention that he took the possession of these equipment at any time during the course of

the investigation.

23. As regards the contradictions that exist between the evidence given by PW1 and PW2, it

is desirable to emphasize that official witnesses such as PW1 and PW2 have the privilege

of referring to their field notes and refresh their memory while testifying, an opportunity

which is not available to other lay witnesses in a criminal trial. While one may argue that

the aforesaid inconsistencies between the two testimonies of PW1 and PW2 are

minor/trivial in nature, considering this privilege that is available to them, as opposed to

other lay witnesses in a trial, I am of the opinion that, it is not unfair or unrealistic to

expect more accurate evidence from the official witnesses in a trial of this nature.

24. Thus, when PW1 and PW2 contradicts on some material points which go to the root of

the matter, it would adversely affect the credibility of the prosecution case.

25. In the Attorney General v. Sandanam Pitchi Mary Theresa [2011] 2 Sri LR 292 the

Court held that:

“Whilst internal contradictions or discrepancies would ordinarily affect the

trustworthiness of the witness statement, it is well established that the Court must

CA/HCC/0175/2024

10 | P a g e

exercise its judgment on the nature of the inconsistency or contradiction and whether

they are material to the fact in issue”

26. Hence, it is not safe to allow the conviction to stand, given the above-mentioned

inconsistencies and the improbableness of the prosecution’s version of events.

27. For the reasons set out above, we allow the Appeal and we proceed to quash the

conviction and the sentence imposed on the Appellant by the learned High Court Judge of

Colombo. Accordingly, we acquit the Appellant of all the charges leveled against him.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J.

I agree,

Judge of the Court of Appeal