1

CA-BAL-81-21 Page 1 of 25 22/03/2023 IJ-15-23

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for Bail under and in terms of section 15 B of the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act of No. 48 of 1979 as amended by Act No. 12 of 2022. M.J.F Sumaiya,Attorney-at-Law, Faris & Associates No.120-1/1, Hulftsdorp Street, Colombo - 12

PetitionerOn Behalf of, Fazrul Rahuman Mohomed Zahran No.19/1, Mattawa Road, Warakamura, Matale. (Presently under remand custody at the Boossa Prison)

Case No: CA/BAL/81/2022 Magistrate Court Colombo Fort Case No: No.B/13100/19

Vs.

1. G.P.Y.S. KeerthisinghaOfficer-In-Charge Gang Robbery Investigation Branch Criminal Investigation Department York Street, Colombo 01.

2. The Director Criminal Investigation Department York Street, Colombo 01.

3. Inspector-General of Police Police Headquarters, Colombo 01. 4. Hon. The Attorney- General Attorney-Generals Department Colombo 12. Respondents

2

CA-BAL-81-21 Page 2 of 25 22/03/2023 IJ-15-23

BEFORE : Menaka Wijesundera J

Neil Iddawala J

COUNSEL : Faris Saly with Senesh Dissanayake instructed by M.J.F. Sumaiya for the Petitioner

Lakmini Girihagama Deputy Solicitor General for the 1-4th Respondents

Argued on

:

07.02.2023

Decided on

:

22.03.2023

Iddawala J

This is an application for bail made by the petitioner appearing on behalf of the suspect

(the Attorney-At-Law of the suspect) in terms of the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary

Provisions) Act, No. 49 of 1979 (hereinafter the PTA) as amended by the Prevention of

Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) (Amendment) Act, No. 12 of 2022.

Background

The facts of the case are as following. The suspect, one Fazrul Rahumam Mohamed

Zahran, was arrested by the Matale Police on the 24.04.2019 and produced before the

Magistrate Court of Matale under the case bearing No AR/493/19 due to a suspicion

of the suspects culpability, although the offence against the suspect was not determined

at the time. He was subsequently released on the 08.05.2019 by the learned Magistrate

as there were no sufficient material to keep the suspect detained. The suspect, at the

time of arrest was 23 years old and was an employee of the Crown Construction

Company in Qatar. He has returned to Sri Lanka on 15.04.2019 due to the inability to

renew his Visa. The suspect was subsequently arrested by the CID under the PTA on

08.05.2019 along with his mobile phone with Subscriber Identity Module (SIM), hard

3

CA-BAL-81-21 Page 3 of 25 22/03/2023 IJ-15-23

disk and computer accessories on the suspicion of the suspect having shared a video

and information to Amaq News Agency via the internet which contained content related

to the Easter bombing attack on the 21.04.2019.

Since then, the suspect has been incarcerated without an indictment being served

against him. Further on the suspect was included as a designated person for conducting

and funding terrorism activities by the Gazette Extraordinary No.2140/16 dated

09/09/2019 with para 3 & 7 of regulation 4 and Gazette Extraordinary No.2291/02

dated 01/08/2022 with regulation 4(7) of the United Nations Regulation No.1 of 2012

of the United Nations Act No.45 of 1968.

Being aggrieved by the said circumstances, the petitioner has filed the instant

application under Section 15B of the PTA as amended by Act, No. 12 of 2022 (hereinafter

the PTA as amended), praying for the suspect to be released on bail.

Arguments

In delving into the arguments made by the two parties, it is noted that the petitioner

rejects the existence of a criminal intention behind the act of sharing a video and avers

that the suspect has been held in incarceration for 3+ years (approximately 3 years and

10 months) without any indication of an indictment been served. The petitioner further

states that the suspect has been in the state of Qatar when the Easter bombing attack

transpired and the suspect was personally affected by the horror of it. Moreover, the

petitioner states that alleged offence was bereft of criminal intention and was merely

done out of curiosity on the part of the suspect. Petitioner further asserted that the

offence of conducting and funding terrorism is unfounded and without cause as the

suspect is not affluent enough to fund any activity given his state of unemployment. In

line with the above arguments, the petitioner states that the prolonged period of

incarceration has caused the suspect and his family to endure physical and mental

agony and more importantly it has unjustifiably squandered the youthfulness of the

suspect for a crime he did not intend or commit.

The respondent submitted that Amaq News Agency has connections to Islamic State of

Iraq and Syria (ISIS) and that the suspect has shared a video with the intention of

attracting others and raising funds for ISISI by posting the said video on Amaq News

4

CA-BAL-81-21 Page 4 of 25 22/03/2023 IJ-15-23

Agency website. Therefore, the respondents purported the objection that the suspect

intentionally corresponded with ISIS and that the suspect has shared the video while

explicitly stating his intention to create a council called the Shura Council and to

establish a new Muslim State called Waliya. The respondents have stated the above

objections in buttressing the culpability of the suspect in maintaining allegiance to ISIS

and to thereby having committed an offence under the PTA.

Before indulging in an analysis of the said averments and the objections, this Court

brings to light the significance of the present application as it is the first of its kind to

be argued at length before the Court of Appeal under the PTA as amended with the

introduction of the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) (Amendment) Act,

No. 12 of 2022. Hence, this Court will take this opportunity to trace the legislative

history of bail under the PTA to shed light in the manner in which Act, No. 12 of 2022

ought to be applied.

Legislative history of the PTA in respect of bail

The principal enactment of Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act, No. 48

of 1979 (hereinafter the PTA) stipulated the following in Section 15: Every person who

commits an offence under this Act shall be triable without a preliminary inquiry, on an

indictment before a Judge of the High Court sitting alone without a jury. Section 15 was

later renamed as Section 15(1) under the Amendment Act, No. 10 of 1982 and the

legislature additionally included a subsection (2) as follows: Upon indictment being

received in the High Court against any person in respect of any offence under this Act or

any offence to which the provisions of section 23 shall apply, the court shall, in every case,

order the remand of such person until the conclusion of the trial. Additionally, Act, No.

10 of 1982 included a new Section to the principal enactment as 15A which dealt with

the place of detention until conclusion of trial. Thereafter, the legislature amended

Section 15(1) under Amendment Act, No. 22 of 1988 to recognize Trial-at-Bar under the

Act: Every person who commits an offence under this Act shall be triable without a

preliminary inquiry, on an indictment before the High Court sitting alone without a jury or

before the High Court at Bar by three Judges without a jury, as may be decided by the

Chief Justice. The provisions of Section 450 and 451 of the Code of Criminal Procedure

Act, no. 15 of 1979, shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to the trial of offences under this Act

5

CA-BAL-81-21 Page 5 of 25 22/03/2023 IJ-15-23

by the High Court at Bar and to appeals from judgments, sentences and orders

pronounced at any such trial held by the High Court at Bar. By Amendment Act, No. 12

of 2022 Section 15B was inserted which stipulates the following:

Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the provisions of this Act, if the

trial against a person remanded or detained under this Act has not

commenced after the expiration of twelve months, from the date of arrest,

the Court of Appeal may release such person on bail, upon an application in

that behalf, made by the suspect or an Attorney- at-Law on his behalf:

Provided however, notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (2) of

section 15, the High Court may in exceptional circumstances release the

suspect on bail subject to such conditions as the High Court may deem fit:

Provided further, where the trial against an accused in respect of whom the

indictment has been forwarded and filed in the High Court, has not

commenced after the expiration of twelve months from the date of such filing,

the High Court may consider to release such person on bail, upon an

application in that behalf made by the accused or an Attorney- at-Law on

his behalf.. (Emphasis added)

Legislative intention behind Section 15B

Prior to the introduction of Section 15B, the PTA did not envision an instance whereby

a court may grant bail to a person suspected or accused under the Act. (See-

Nithyanathan and Others Vs. Attorney General 20031 SLR 399) Litigants had to sort

recourse outside the PTA such as the Constitution and the Code of Criminal Procedure

Act, No. 15 of 1979 as amended (hereinafter the CPC), to seek redress. However, with

the enactment of Act, No. 12 of 2022, the legislature has explicitly recognised the

jurisdiction of the High Court and the Court of Appeal to release suspects arrested under

the PTA under specific circumstances. Hence, when a judge is met with the task of

interpreting Section 15B, such interpretation must reflect the legislative thinking which

prompted a pivot from the historical intentions of the PTA.

6

CA-BAL-81-21 Page 6 of 25 22/03/2023 IJ-15-23

A perusal of the Parliamentary Debates (Hansard) Volume 189, No 5, Column 780 to

789 dated Tuesday, 22nd March 2022 concerning Act, No. 12 of 2022 allows one to

ascertain the legislative intention behind the said amendment to the PTA.

The Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Hon, (Prof.) G. L. Peiris presented the amended Bill,

whereby he highlighted the need to revisit the provisions of the PTA in keeping with the

basic social transformation and circumstances, priorities, and objectives of the country

since its enactment in 1979. The Minister remarked as follows:

Having regard to all the changes which have taken place in our country during the

last 43 years, we have whittled down the provisions of the Prevention of Terrorism

Act, diminished its rigidity in a manner that is appropriate to the present stage of

development of Sri Lankan society. We have stopped short of abolishing it

altogether. That is too extreme a step and lacks a sense of balance (Column-788).

Another instance where the Hon. Minister remarked on the ethos of the Act, No. 12 of

2022 is in Column 780 of the Hansard:

.when you take the Amendments a whole, in combination, I make bold to say

that the cumulative effect of these Amendments is to make a very substantial

improvement of the existing lawI can convince any objective fair-minded

person that these Amendments, without any extraneous agenda, will make a

profound impact upon the existing laws of this country and that these Amendments

will significantly further the cause of human rights and human freedoms in Sri

Lanka.

I would like to pause at this juncture and refer to a judgment delivered by this Bench

prior to the enactment of Act, No. 12 of 2022. In Hejaz Omer Hizbullah v Hon.

Attorney General CA/PHC/APN/10/2022 CA Minute dated 07.02.2022, this Bench

acting in revision, granted bail to the petitioner who was an accused under the PTA by

relying on Article 145 of the Constitution. It must be highlighted that the judgment in

Hejaaz Omer Hizbullah (supra) pivoted on the application of Article 145 of the

Constitution and the powers vested with the Court of Appeal therein. Therefore, it must

be noted that the power of granting bail by the Court of Appeal in exercising its

revisionary powers under Article 145 of the Constitution in the interests of justice is by

7

CA-BAL-81-21 Page 7 of 25 22/03/2023 IJ-15-23

no way undermined by the new amendment Act, No. 12 of 2022. It is the considered

views of this Court that the powers of the Court of Appeal under Article 145 of the

Constitution remain intact and remains to be exercised in the appropriate case. In the

said judgment, this Bench evaluated the factual circumstances in the interest of justice

and made the following observation in anticipation of Act, No. 12 of 2022: ..Even the

executive branch of the government is considering the amendment of the PTA (The Gazette

of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka Part II of January 21, 2022; Issued on

27.01.2022 and published by the Minister of Foreign Affairs), expressing a willingness to

balance the need to eradicate terrorism against personal liberty as enshrined in the

Fundamental Rights Chapter of the Constitution (at page 6). In the same light, the Hon.

Minster made the following remarks during the Parliamentary debate of the amending

Bill (supra):

..this has been a perennial tension though all civilizations security, on the

one hand, and liberty, freedom, on the other. You have to arrive at an equilibrium

between these two, a perceptive balance which has to be made in relation to

contextual factors, the circumstances that are applicable to a particular society at

a particular stage of its development (column 788 of the Hansard).

Moreover, the Hon. Minister reflected on the grave injustices caused by a strict bar

against the release of suspects arrested under the PTA in its unamended version:

the existing position in our country is that there can be and there had

been, in some cases, unfortunately, and interval as long as six months or nine

months between one date of trial and another, this means that the person who is

subject to the Determination Order is languishing in custody for unjustifiably long

periods because the trial is taking so long (column 781 of the Hansard).

The Hon. Minister compares the state of the law prior and subsequent to the proposed

Bill (Act, No. 12 of 2022 as it stands now) as follows: under the existing law or the PTA,

as it stands now, once a trial commences, until it is concluded, the High Court Judge is

compelled to keep the accused, the suspect, in detention or in remand. That is no longer

the case, . After this Amendment is enacted into law, the High Court Judge,

8

CA-BAL-81-21 Page 8 of 25 22/03/2023 IJ-15-23

even while the proceedings are in progress, has the discretion to grant bail in appropriate

cases. (Emphasis added)

Speaking on the effect of the proposed Section 15B, the Minister stated that litigants

may no longer be required to depend on the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of

Appeal, as was done in the case of Hejaz Hizbullah (supra), instead the PTA itself

explicitly provides for avenues to make an application for bail. Speaking on the said

Section, the Minister referred to legislative prescription in terms of vesting the High

Court and Court of Appeal with the necessary and explicit jurisdiction to grant bail to

suspects/accused under the PTA. This was deemed as countering the discrepancies

created in the existing application of Section 15(2) of the PTA where there is an

uncertainty as to whether the Court can or cannot intervene to release a person from

custody (column 786 of the Hansard).

Thus, with the enactment of Act, No. 12 of 2022, the legislature has intended to address,

to a certain extent, the perils of the PTA prior to the amendment. Furthermore, it is

evident that the legislature seeks to generate a change in the manner in which the aspect

of bail is handled under the PTA.

While the enactment of Act, No. 12 of 2022 is only a single step in the re-evaluation of

national security laws of Sri Lanka, in interpreting the said amendment to the PTA, the

judiciary ought to reflect the ethos and spirit of the legislation as explained above. In

doing so, one must take caution to weigh the interests of public security and individual

liberty on a case-by-case basis and make a sound determination so that the PTA is

tamed against a reversion to its rigorous past.

Interpretation of Section 15B

Section 15B has explicitly recognized three stages at which a person arrested under the

PTA is rendered an opportunity to make a request to be admitted to bail. By the

operation of time and other specific instances which will be discussed later, a person

arrested under the PTA is entitled to request bail either from the High Court or the Court

of Appeal, as the case may be, and the legislature has explicitly recognized the

jurisdiction of each court to grant bail under appropriate conditions.

9

CA-BAL-81-21 Page 9 of 25 22/03/2023 IJ-15-23

Section 15B as contained in Clause 10 of Act, No. 2 of 2022 is reproduced below:

Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the provisions of this Act, if the

trial against a person remanded or detained under this Act has not

commenced after the expiration of twelve months, from the date of arrest,

the Court of Appeal may release such person on bail, upon an application in

that behalf, made by the suspect or an Attorney- at-Law on his behalf:

Provided however, notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (2) of

section 15, the High Court may in exceptional circumstances release the

suspect on bail subject to such conditions as the High Court may deem fit:

Provided further, where the trial against an accused in respect of whom the

indictment has been forwarded and filed in the High Court, has not

commenced after the expiration of twelve months from the date of such filing,

the High Court may consider to release such person on bail, upon an

application in that behalf made by the accused or an Attorney- at-Law on

his behalf.. (Emphasis added)

Hence, in Clause 10 of the Act, No. 12 of 2022, the legislature has stipulated three

instances whereby a person remanded or detained under the PTA can make an

application for bail either to the High Court or the Court of Appeal as the case may be:

1. If the trial has not commenced after the expiration of twelve months from the date

of arrest, the Court of Appeal may release such person on bail (hereinafter the

first instance)

2. If the indictment has been served and the person shows exceptional

circumstances to be admitted into bail, the High Court may release such person

on bail (hereinafter the second instance)

3. If the trial has not commenced after the expiration of twelve months since the

forwarding and filing of the indictment in the High Court, the High Court may

consider to release such person on bail (hereinafter the third instance)

(emphasis added)

10

CA-BAL-81-21 Page 10 of 25 22/03/2023 IJ-15-23

A fourth instance whereby a person can be released on bail under the PTA is contained

in Clause 11 of Act, No. 12 of 2022. It repealed Section 19 and substituted it with the

following:

Notwithstanding the provisions of any other written law, every person convicted

by any court of any offence under this Act shall, notwithstanding that he has

lodged a petition of appeal against his conviction or the sentence imposed on him,

be kept on remand until the determination of the appeal:

Provided however, that the Court of Appeal may in exceptional circumstances

release on bail any such person subject to such conditions as the Court of Appeal

may deem fit. (Hereinafter the fourth instance) (Emphasis added)

Hence, the Court of Appeal can release a person convicted under the PTA on bail pending

appeal upon satisfying the existence of exceptional circumstances.

As such, it is clear that with the advent of Act, No. 12 of 2022, the legislature has

delineated more avenues for persons arrested under the PTA to request bail, whilst

affording discretion to the judges to decide whether the circumstances of such persons

warrant their admittance to bail. In all the four instances listed above, the legislature

has utilized the phrase may whereby judicial discretion has been reinforced.

While this liberal approach is quite the departure from the earlier rigidity, the

application of the PTA in terms of bail still carries with its elements of judicial discretion.

Each case must be viewed on the merits of its facts and circumstances and only in the

appropriate case should the court exercise its discretion to release a person under the

PTA on bail. To that end and as a guide for future interpretation, this Court would like

to elaborate on the distinction between the four instances regarding bail envisaged by

the Act, No. 12 of 2022. However, it must be reinforced that judicial discretion must be

exercised based on the specific facts and circumstances of each case which may very

well vary on a case-by-case basis.

This court will now deal with each of the instances delineated above.

11

CA-BAL-81-21 Page 11 of 25 22/03/2023 IJ-15-23

First Instance

The first instance stipulates if the trial has not commenced after the expiration of twelve

months from the date of arrest, the Court of Appeal may release such person on bail.

Here is an instance where an indictment is yet to be served on the person and the person

has been languishing in prison for more than twelve months since his arrest under the

PTA. The legislative prescription of twelve month coupled with the absence of an

indictment serves as a criterion as to when the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal can

be invoked under Section 15B. If not, the Court of Appeal will be inundated with

litigation under the PTA. If either one of the criteria is not fulfilled, for example if twelve

months have not expired or indictment has been served, an applicant cannot come

before the Court of Appeal under Section 15B. For such applicants, recourse is available

before the High Court, as will be discussed later.

It is pertinent to note that, the legislature has not provided for the grounds upon which

the grant or refusal to grant bail may be considered by the Court of Appeal. It only

delineates the criteria by which an applicant is eligible to apply for bail. The question of

whether bail ought to be granted or not rests with the judicial discretion of the presiding

judge.

To that end, some guidance can be taken from existing judicial precedent and legal

principles pertaining to bail. While there is a wealth of judicial precedent on the law

relating to bail, the celebrated judgment of R v Toussaint 12 NLR 65, made the following

observation: no doubt the main object of requiring bail is to ensure the attendance of

a person charged with a criminal offence, but there are other considerations which the

Court in the exercise of its discretion generally takes into account. The first accused is

charged with very serious offence punishable with long terms of imprisonment. The

judgment quoted the words of Grener AJ in Etrenne Barromet v Edmond Allain, Ellis

and Blackburn, p. 1 the Court has discretion to admit accused persons to bail in all

cases, but in exercising that discretion the nature of the charge, the evidence by which

it is supported, and the sentence which by law may be passed in the event of a conviction

are in general the most important ingredients for the guidance of the Court, and where

these are weighty the Court will not interfere.

12

CA-BAL-81-21 Page 12 of 25 22/03/2023 IJ-15-23

Undoubtedly, any offence that threatens national security is of very serious nature.

However, in dealing with such a case, the mere accusation of an offence under the PTA

ought not to be regarded as an automatic refusal of bail. In line with the legislative

intention in introducing Act, No. 12 of 2022 and the change it sought to achieve, the

seriousness of the accusation should be viewed within the evidence available against

the suspect. An act that may seemingly entail terrorist connotations cannot be viewed

in isolation as it would not necessarily constitute a public emergency, threatening the

life of a nation or national security. Nevertheless, the converse of the same may also be

true. Given the complexity of dealing with national security as against individual liberty,

courts should undoubtedly pay their attention to the finer nuances of an impugned act

while exercising discretion. There must exist a serious threat to the national security or

communal harmony. As referred to in the above quote, such evidence must be weighty

against a suspect to order his continued incarceration despite the lapse of twelve

months since the arrest and the absence of an indictment. This is most pertinent

considering the history of the application of the PTA in bail matters and the prolonged

periods of incarceration that followed therein. With the advent of Act, No. 12 of 2022 the

legislature has sought to depart from the normalcy of prolonged incarceration under the

PTA and has sought to generate a change where individual liberty is secured in tandem

with the protection of national security. Therefore, the prosecution must satisfy why a

person must continue to be incarcerated over a prolonged period under the PTA, it can

no longer be an automatic state of affairs. Instead, defining national security in precise

terms would be a challenging task. In, Ex-Armymen's Proetction Services Private

Limited Vs Union of India and Others [(2014) no.2876/14] decided by the Indian

Supreme Court where Kurian J. observed as follows: -"It is difficult to define in exact

terms as to what is national security. However, the same would generally include socio-

political stability, territorial integrity, economic solidarity and strength, ecological balance,

cultural cohesiveness, external peace etc. What is in the interest of national security is

not a question of law. It is a matter of policy. It is not for the Court to decide whether

something is in the interest of State or not. It should be left to the Executive.

In the House of Lords, Lord Hoffman in Secretary of State for the Home Department

v Rehman (2001-UKHL 47 p) stated The matter of national security is not a question of

13

CA-BAL-81-21 Page 13 of 25 22/03/2023 IJ-15-23

law. It is a matter of judgement and policy. Under the constitution of the United Kingdom

and most other countries, decisions as to whether something is or is not in the interest

of national security are not a matter for judicial decision. They are entrusted to the

executive.

This Court will not attempt to delineate an exhaustive list of considerations that a

presiding judge ought to take cognizance of when dealing with the bail application under

the PTA as amended by Act, No. 12 of 2022. Nevertheless, the rationale behind the

concept of bail and the fundamental tenets therein must be considered when

approaching its application.

In general, the right to bail is a universal concept for it is derived from a connate sense

of justice which embeds values such as liberty and equality at its core. This concept is

centered upon the principle of presumption of innocence until proved guilty which

seeks to preserve the liberty of an individual and the right to be abstained from arbitrary

arrest, detention or held in custody prior to a conviction beyond a reasonable doubt.

This principle is entrenched in many regional, domestic and international legislations

under the rubric of fundamental, civil and political rights. Sri Lanka has endorsed this

principle under the Supreme law of the land: the Constitution. Article 13(5) of the

Constitution stipulates that Every person shall be presumed innocent until he is proved

guilty. Similarly, the International Covenant on Civil & Political Rights (ICCPR), under

Article 14(2) stipulates that a person is presumed to be innocent until proved guilty.

Article 11 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights further cements the principle

of presumption of innocence. As reverberated by Justice V.R. Krishnaiyer in Gudikanti

Narasimhulu and Others vs Public Prosecutor, High Court of Andhra Pradesh 1978

AIR 429, 1978 SCR (2) 371 The issue of bail is one of liberty, justice, public safety and

burden of the public treasury, all of which insist that a developed jurisprudence of bail is

integral to a socially sensitized judicial process.

Hence, when considering the grant of bail under the amended PTA which requires the

discretion of the court, one can refer accepted considerations such as the gravity and

severity of the offence and the nature of accusation; severity of punishment if convicted;

the likelihood of the accused fleeing from justice; the possibility of tampering with the

evidence and/or the witnesses; the possibility of repetition of the offence or similar

14

CA-BAL-81-21 Page 14 of 25 22/03/2023 IJ-15-23

offence while on bail; the prima facie satisfaction of the court in support of the charge

including frivolity of the charge; the peculiar facts of each case and nature of supporting

evidence etc. When the circumstances of a particular case is viewed in totality with other

consideration such as the personal standing of the applicant and his or her ability to

take part in the justice process in light of their personal commitments may also be

considered. More importantly, courts can take cognizance of the progress made by

investigating and prosecutorial authorities to process a complaint.

Unreasonable delay in that aspect would usually be favorable to the applicant, as courts

are increasingly opening itself to new technology as means of expediting the proper

administration of justice. As the legislature intervenes to further justice in concurrence

with the changing world, other organs involved in the justice system must follow suit

and attempt to break away from age old processes and primeval practices that stands

in the way of administration of justice. Additionally, courts may weigh contrary factors

such as promotion of public fairness and public evolutionary policy, the considerable

public expense in keeping a suspect/accused in custody where no danger of

disappearance or disturbance can arise. However, the most important aspect to guide

the release of suspects on bail should be to ensure the presence of the suspect who

seeks to be liberated, to face the trial to take judgment and serve sentence in the event

of the court convicts and punishing him with imprisonment. As such the likelihood of a

person absconding for fear of a severe sentence under the PTA can be considered. All

these possible considerations must be viewed in relation to one another and the facts of

a case when judicial discretion is utilized. They cannot be viewed in a vacuum.

As such, when a person has been arrested and no indictment has been served against

them despite the period of incarceration has prevailed for 12 months, under the first

instance, such person will be eligible to apply for bail. Thereafter, the presiding judge

may utilize the above discussed consideration in exercising judicial discretion to

determine whether bail should be granted or not.

Before dealing with the second instance, the third instance will be discussed.

15

CA-BAL-81-21 Page 15 of 25 22/03/2023 IJ-15-23

Third Instance

The third instance stipulates that if the trial has not commenced after the expiration of

twelve months since the forwarding and filing of the indictment in the High Court, the

High Court may consider releasing such person on bail. This provision encounters a

situation where an indictment has been forwarded and filed. Hence this is a distinctly

different scenario to the first instance discussed above.

In the third instance, jurisdiction of the High Court to grant bail can be invoked upon

the fulfilment of two criteria, namely, the serving and filing of indictment and the

absence in the commencement of trial even after the expiration of twelve months since

such filing. The similarity between the first instance and the third instance is that

neither stipulates any grounds for consideration in exercising the judicial discretion to

either grant or refuse to grant bail. Nevertheless, as discussed in the previous part, some

guidance can be derived from existing precedent and principles subject to the caveat

that each case ought to be decided on its peculiar facts and circumstances. Yet a slight

dissimilarity is present in the wording of the first and third instances.

In the first instance, the legislative language is the Court of Appeal may release..

However, in the third instance the language used is the High Court may consider to

release.. This slight variation is a recognition of the difference between the two

situations where in the former (first instance), an indictment is yet to be served. In the

latter scenario (third instance), the Attorney General has perused the IBEs and has

decided that the evidence against the accused has a reasonable prospect of securing a

conviction or that there exists a prima facie case to proceed with the prosecution. In

such a context, the High Court Judge has discretion to either consider the bail

application or refuse to do so. However, this does not mean that the High Court judge

ought to dismiss the application in limine. It is a mere expression that the burden on

the applicant requesting for bail is slightly higher in the third instance, than it is in the

first instance. Because in the latter, the prosecution is yet to decide whether a case can

be sustained against the suspect.

16

CA-BAL-81-21 Page 16 of 25 22/03/2023 IJ-15-23

Second Instance

The second instance is provided in Section 15B as Provided however, notwithstanding

the provisions of subsection (2) of section 15, the High Court may in exceptional

circumstances release the suspect on bail subject to such conditions as the High Court

may deem fit. Section 15(2) envisions a situation where indictment has been served on

the suspect. Whilst at first glance this seems quite similar to the third instance

discussed above, the distinction lies in the inclusion of exceptional circumstance

criteria and exclusion of a legislative prescription (twelve months). Here, unlike in the

first and third instances, the legislature has designated a ground upon which the court

must decide the issuance of bail or the lack thereof.

As such, under the second instance, the High Courts jurisdiction for bail can be

invoked, even if the trial has commenced. This stipulation caters to instances where the

facts of the case present some exceptionality that warrants the release of the suspect

from incarceration. The Legislatures inclusion of exceptionality in the second instance,

and its exclusion in the first and third instances must be given due recognition in

exercising judicial discretion.

While the term exceptional circumstance has not been defined in Act, No. 12 of 2022,

it is evident that the burden on the applicant is much higher than the first and third

instances explored above. Similar exceptionality is required in the case of bail pending

appeal under Act, No. 12 of 2022 as evinced from Section 19, referred to as the fourth

instance in the instant examination.

As such, the fourth instance designates the following:

Notwithstanding the provisions of any other written law, every person convicted

by any court of any offence under this Act shall, notwithstanding that he has

lodged a petition of appeal against his conviction or the sentence imposed on him,

be kept on remand until the determination of the appeal:

Provided however, that the Court of Appeal may in exceptional circumstances

release on bail any such person subject to such conditions as the Court of Appeal

may deem fit. (Emphasis added))

17

CA-BAL-81-21 Page 17 of 25 22/03/2023 IJ-15-23

Therefore, in both the second instance and the fourth instance, an applicant must

satisfy the High Court (in the second instance) and the Court of Appeal (in the fourth

instance), as to the existence of exceptional circumstances. Ultimately it will be up to

the judicial discretion to decide whether the exceptionality contended warrants

admittance of the applicant into bail.

Exceptional Circumstances

As examined in the previous section, the PTA as amended by Act, No. 12 of 2022

explicitly recognized four instances in which a person arrested under the PTA is granted

the opportunity to make an application to be admitted to bail. In doing so, the legislature

designates two occasions (second instance and fourth instance) whereby the Court of

Appeal or High Court may, in exceptional circumstances release a suspect on bail.

Alternatively, it must be noted that the lack of mention of exceptionality in the first and

third instances should not lose its importance as well.

However, the Act, No. 12 of 2022 does not indicate the manner in which exceptional

circumstance needs to be interpreted. In general terms, an exceptional circumstance

is an instance which occurs out of the ordinary, unavoidably or unexpectedly. For the

purpose of the Act, No. 12 of 2022, it is clear that the presiding judge in the PTA matter

has the sole power and discretion to decide instances that fall within the ambit of

exceptional circumstances.

For example; if a bail application is pleaded on the ground of severe health condition of

an accused/suspect, the court must be satisfied that the said health condition is either

life-threatening or that such a health condition cannot be treated while in remand which

poses the threat of aggravating the illness. Further, in instances of oppressiveness and

lack of progress in serving an indictment, the courts may be enlightened to consider

such oppressiveness and inordinate delays as exceptional circumstance to grant bail.

The Act, No. 12 of 2022, to a certain extent, recognizes the values endorsed in human

freedom and fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution of the country. Hence,

it is the duty of the court to prevent the stringent, mechanical and monotonous

application of rules and instead, espouse the judicious use of discretion in an

appropriate manner based on the facts and circumstances of each case. Exceptionality

18

CA-BAL-81-21 Page 18 of 25 22/03/2023 IJ-15-23

of suspects would vary from one case to another. Thereby, it is essential for the courts

to pay close attention to each case in a meticulous manner.

Moreover, judgments pronounced under exceptional circumstances should not be

pronounced in a prejudiced manner or to impress a particular party. Apart from

considering human freedom and fundamental rights of the suspect (such as

presumption of innocence until proven guilty), the court has to give prominence to the

impact a particular suspect may have in the society in terms of public security and

communal harmony. Thus, the court must weigh the interest of the public security

against the individual liberty on a case-by-case basis.

In summation, Act, No. 12 of 2022 has amended the PTA to provide four instances where

the High Court and Court of Appeal is granted explicit jurisdiction to release a person

arrested/ detained under the PTA on bail upon the fulfilment of certain criteria. In the

first and third instances, certain criterion are stipulated to qualify for the invocation of

the respective courts jurisdiction such as legislative prescription, serving of indictment

or not, beginning of trial or not. After such qualification, the respective court can use

its discretion to decide whether the facts present an appropriate case to release the

litigant on bail. To that end, guidance may be had on existing case law precedent on

bail. In the second and fourth instance, the respective court will only grant bail if the

applicant proves exceptional circumstances.

It is evident that the PTA as it stands today envisions a hierarchy in the burden placed

on an applicant for bail at each of the four instances recognized in Section 15B and

Section 19. These four instances ought to be viewed in connection to each other as

opposed to in a vacuum in deciding the way judicial discretion ought to be exercised. At

each instance, the legislative intention behind the enactment of Act, No. 12 of 2022

must be visited and the relevant section interpreted according to the facts and

circumstances of each case. It must be stressed that the requirement of exceptionality

is restricted only to two out of the four instances of granting bail under the PTA as

amended by Act, No. 12 of 2022.

At this juncture, it is pertinent to refer back to Hon. Ministers speech at Column 788

of the Hansard (supra) where he remarked on the applicability of the PTA. The Minister

19

CA-BAL-81-21 Page 19 of 25 22/03/2023 IJ-15-23

stressed that the provisions of the PTA must be resorted to only in very exceptional

circumstances stating that It cannot be the norm; it is not the rule it is very much the

exception whilst referring to the normal provisions of the law (for example the Criminal

Procedure Code) to be accepted as a norm and that it is only in very exceptional cases

where there is manifest evidence indicative of some terrorist dimension that recourse to

the Prevention of Terrorism Act will be justifiable. Therefore, when presented with a bail

application under the Act, No. 12 of 2022, the presiding judge may also consider

whether the PTA has been applied in the correct manner so that the true intention of

the new amendment is fully realized. The observation made by a five bench judges in

the Supreme Court in Attorney General Vs Sumithipala 2006 2 SLR 126 is more

appropriate to the present context. A judge cannot under a thin guise of interpretation

usurp the functions of the legislature to achieve a result that the judge thinks is desirable

in the interest of justice. Therefore, the role of the judge is to give effect to the expressed

intention of Parliament as it is the bounden duty of any court and the function of every

judge to do justice with in the stipulated parameters.

The advent of Act, No. 12 of 2022 signifies a major change of legislative policy in the

application of the PTA where the policy to granting bail in appropriate cases using the

discretion of the courts have been incorporated. The true manifestation of this policy

initiative will only be possible if the courts interpreting and applying the said law,

respect such policy initiative. Act, No. 12 of 2022 upholds the values endorsed in

human freedom and fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution of the country.

Hence, it is the duty of the court to prevent the mechanical application of rules and

espouse the judicious use of discretion in an appropriate manner based on the facts

and circumstances of each case. It is the duty of the presiding judge to interpret the

amended PTA in line with this thinking so that the legislative intervention of curbing

the rigid elements of the PTA is reinforced by judicial interpretation and application.

The following passage of the Lord Denning MR in the case of Ward vs James (1965) 1

ALL ER 563 at 571 is precisely applicable to the context of present day. His Lordship

stated that "the cases all show that when a statute gives a discretion the courts must not

fetter it by rigid rules from which a judge is never at liberty to depart. Nevertheless, the

Courts can lay down the considerations which should be borne in mind in exercising the

discretion and point out those considerations which should be ignored. This will normally

20

CA-BAL-81-21 Page 20 of 25 22/03/2023 IJ-15-23

determine the way in which the decision is exercised and thus ensure some measure of

uniformity of decisions. From time to time the considerations may change as public policy

changes and so the pattern of decisions may change. This is all part of the evolutionary

process" (emphasize added).

Analysis of facts

Accordingly, with the above backdrop in mind, it is fitting to delve into the nuances of

the matter at hand. Firstly, in determining the locus standi of the petitioner to appear

on behalf of the suspect, recourse to Section 15B of the PTA as amended can be had

which stipulates that upon an application in that behalf, made by the suspect or an

Attorney- at-Law on his behalf

This section expressly provides for the representation of a suspect in detention or in

remand by an Attorney-at-law in an instance where the suspect is unable to appear

himself. This is further buttressed by Section 10A of the PTA as amended, which further

states an Attorney-At-Law has access to persons remanded or detained under the PTA

and representations can be made on behalf of such persons subjected to the regulations

and conditions prescribed therein. Therefore, in light of the above law, it is clear that a

person detained or remanded under the PTA can be represented by an Attorney-At-Law

as relatives have limited and restricted access to the suspect. (See also Section 10A (2)

of the PTA as amended in this regard). Hence, the representation of the suspect of the

instant case by the petitioner who is an Attorney-At-Law is prescribed by the law and is

apropos.

It is now pertinent to lay out the analysis with respect to the averments and the

objections made by the respective parties. The petitioner avers that the suspect has

been held in incarceration for 3+ years without an indictment been served. As

expounded above, there are four instances in which a suspect can be enlarged on bail

by either the High Court or the Court of Appeal. The instant application falls under the

first instance in which the Court of Appeal can consider enlarging a suspect on bail.

According to the first instance as expounded earlier, the criterion to invoke the

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal comprises of the expiration of the prescribed period

of 12 months and the absence of an indictment been served. This instance necessitates

21

CA-BAL-81-21 Page 21 of 25 22/03/2023 IJ-15-23

the fulfillment of both limbs of the criterion to invoke the jurisdiction of the Court of

Appeal in order to consider granting bail to the suspect under Section 15B of the PTA

as amended. This Court observes that the suspect has been held in incarceration for 3+

years which clearly exceeds the legislative prescription of the PTA as amended. The

respondents have failed to provide a certain indication of when an indictment could be

served. Thereby, the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal can be invoked with respect to

considering the grant of bail to the suspect.

In her submissions, the learned DSG appearing on behalf of the respondents referred

to the cases of Wickramasinghe v Attorney General and Another, 2010, 1, SLR 144p,

and Shiyam Vs Police Narcotic Bureau 2006 B.L.R. 52p and stressed the following

passage in order to highlight the fact that the Bail Act will not be applicable in an

instance where the law has expressly provided for bail under Section 3 of the Bail Act

and to emphasis that it was not the intention of the legislature to release each and every

suspect who has been on remand for period exceeding 24 months. But this is not the

correct position after the introduction of Act No. 12 of 2022, court has a discretion to

consider bail, where a suspect/accused accomplishes the legislative prescription, as I

explained above.

This Court concurs with the submission to the extent that the Bail Act is excluded when

bail is considered under the PTA. Under general law bail is governed under the Bail Act,

No.30 of 1997, the CPC and other legislations which expressly provide for the release of

persons on bail. Section 3(1) of the Bail Act stipulates that Nothing in this Act shall

apply to any person accused or inspected of having committed, or convicted of, an offence

under, the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act. No 48 of 1979, Regulations

made under the Public Security Ordinance or any other written law which makes express

provision in respect of the release on bail of persons accused or suspected of having

committed, or convicted of, offences under such other written law. Hence, it is precisely

clear that by virtue of the above section, the provisions of the Bail Act would not be

applicable to a suspect being charged under the provision of the PTA. Yet the said

inapplicability does not translate to an exclusion of the fundamental principles

governing bail. It can be interpreted to mean that a suspect arrested under the PTA

cannot apply for bail under the Bail Act but must rely on the PTA as amended or other

22

CA-BAL-81-21 Page 22 of 25 22/03/2023 IJ-15-23

avenues such as the Constitution. Similarly, the designation of the four instances of

bail as envisioned in Act, No. 12 of 2022 does not apply to bail matters governed under

the Bail Act. Therefore, the exclusion of the Bail Act on matters falling under the PTA as

amended does not exclude the application of the principles of the law governing bail. As

expounded above, the core principles that underlie the concept of bail which can be

derived from case law emanating from the Bail Act can serve as guidance to the exercise

of judicial discretion under the PTA as amended.

Although, the learned DSG has cited Wickremasinghe Vs A.G (supra) to rule out the

application of the Bail Act and to justify the long period of incarceration of the suspect,

this Court would like to draw attention to the rationale of the case where it was held

that Purpose of remanding a suspect /accused is, in my view to ensure his appearance

in court on each and every day that the case is called in court. If the Court feels that he

would appear in Court after his release on bail, court should enlarge him on bail. Court

should not remand a suspect/accused in order to punish him. (At page146). This case

sheds light on one of the core principles of granting bail to a suspect which is that

refusal to grant bail cannot be construed as a form of punishment to the suspect. In an

instance where the court is convinced that the suspect will not abscond and will appear

before the court where necessary, the court has the discretion to consider such factors

in determining whether to refuse or grant such persons on bail in the interest of justice.

Furthermore, it is observed by this Court that the learned DSG has not objected the

grant of bail to the suspect on any substantial grounds like the possibility of the suspect

absconding, tampering with witnesses, posing a threat to the national security and

communal harmony or the possibility of the suspect reoffending if released out on bail.

The learned DSG has failed to convince this Court of the reasons as to why the court

should not enlarge the suspect on bail. The learned DSG has merely announced that

the investigations are almost over as they are still awaiting the government analyst

report and has mentioned that the indictment will be served in the near future, albeit

an exact time frame has not been provided which leaves this Court with the impression

that the time of indicting the suspect is still indefinite.

Against such a submission, the facts available before this Court presents that the

suspect has shared a video and information via an entity that is alleged to have links to

23

CA-BAL-81-21 Page 23 of 25 22/03/2023 IJ-15-23

ISIS. These facts alone do not warrant an incarceration for over 3+ years, especially in

a context where an indictment has not been served. On the one hand, the suspect has

exercised his freedom of expression and on the other, the prosecution has failed to

gather any substantive evidence during the course of the said 3+ years to justify the

continuation of the incarceration. The mere sharing of a video which express a view or

amounts to a seeming act that threatens national security does not warrant a period of

incarceration exceeding 46 months. The inability of the respondents to forward an

indictment for 3+ years further points to the lack of possibility to begin a prosecution

based on the material available against the suspect.

The learned DSGs contention that the suspect should not be enlarged on bail and that

the delay in receiving the government analysts report has caused the delay in tying up

the investigations is unacceptable. As stressed above, for the true potential of Act, No.

12 of 2022 to be realized, all arms of the law enforcement in the country must work in

tandem to expedite justice. While the contention of the DSG on the delay may have been

a sufficient ground for continued incarceration under the PTA prior to its amendment

in 2022, as the law and the state of affairs stand today, it is not. Given the abundance

of technology to expedite proceedings at the hand of law enforcement units, the judiciary

cannot endorse restriction of personal liberty for delays on the part of the prosecution

to build a substantive case against a person. Such an endorsement would be contrary

to justice and tantamount to oppression of the suspect. As such the position of the

prosecution is not weighty when compared to the submissions of the petitioner in light

of the legislative intention behind the application of Act, No. 12 of 2022.

The law does not allow for the construing of inordinate delays and prolonged period of

incarceration as a form of punishment and thus, the law enforcement units have a duty

to ensure the protection of the personal liberty and the fundamental rights of an

individual to be free from arbitrary arrest and detention. The prolonged period of

incarceration has aggrieved the family members of the suspect and has also squandered

the youth of the suspect as he has spent an inordinate number of years in detention

without a firm indication of being indicted and being able to present averments against

such indictment. This is a clear manifestation of contravention of the basic rights of the

suspect and a blatant disregard of justice, a very fact that is sought to be tamed by the

advent of Act, No. 12 of 2022. As I mentioned above and in line of the thinking of the

24

CA-BAL-81-21 Page 24 of 25 22/03/2023 IJ-15-23

lawmakers, it has been a perennial tension though all civilizations security, on the one

hand, and liberty, freedom of an individual on the other. This Court has to arrive at an

equilibrium between these two, a sensitive balance which has to be made in relation to

contextual factors.

Hence, taking into consideration the lack of a rational basis to refuse to enlarge the

suspect on bail and the prolonged period of incarceration of the suspect without an

indictment being served, brings the suspect within the framework laid under Section

15B of the PTA as amended, thereby enabling the suspect to be granted bail by the

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal. Therefore, in light of the above contentions, it is the

considered view of this Court, the suspect should be enlarged on bail.

Thus, this Court, while urging the authorities to expedite the matter, orders the suspect

to be enlarged on bail upon the following conditions.

Bail conditions

1. A cash Bail of Rupees One Hundred Thousand (Rs 100,000/-_).

2. Two sureties acceptable to the learned Magistrate Colombo Fort, to the

value of 500,000/- each.

3. Suspect to report to the Head Office of the Criminal Investigation

Department every 2nd and 4th Sunday of every month between 9.00 am

3.00 pm.

4. Passport or any travel document to be surrendered to the Magistrate of

Colombo Fort if it has not been done so.

5. Suspect should not change his permanent residence without informing the

Magistrate of Colombo Fort and permanent residential address to be

submitted to the Registrar of the Magistrate Court of Colombo Fort

certified by the relevant Grama Seva Officer.

6. The suspect is severely warned not to interfere with the investigation or

witnesses under any circumstances.

25

CA-BAL-81-21 Page 25 of 25 22/03/2023 IJ-15-23

7. Violation of one or more conditions set out above amounts to cancel this

bail order.

Registrar of this Court is directed to dispatch a copy of this order to the

Magistrate of Colombo Fort.

Bail granted.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Menaka Wijesundera J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL