1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA (PHC) 218/2005 Anuradhapura HC NO.5212003WRIT

In the matter of an application in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution seeking mandate in the nature of certiorari together with Section 7 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1999.

P.M. Mahindapala, No. 08, Public Market, Cross Road, Anuradhapura.

Petitioner

VS.

1. The Municipal Council, Anuradhapura.

2. The Mayor, Municipal Council, Anuradhapura.

3. H.L.K. Caldera, Member Municipal Council, 596/80, K.B. Ratnayake Mawatha, Stall 50, Anuradhapura.

Respondents

AND

BEFORE

COUNSEL

2

P.M. Mahindapala, No.08, Public Market, Cross Road, Anuradhapura.

Petitioner - Appellant

VS.

1. Municipal Council. Anuradhapura.

2. The Mayor, Municipal Council, Anuradhapura.

3. H.L.K. Caldera, Member Municipal Council, 596/80, K.B. Ratnayake Mawatha, Stall 50, Anuradhapura.

Respondent - Respondents

W.M.M. Malinie Gunaratne, J. and

P.R. Walgama J.

D. Karunaratne

for the 1 st and 2nd Respondents

Appellant was absent and unrepresented.

Argued

Written submissions filed on

Decided on

Malinie Gunaratne, J.

3

15.10.2015.

09.12.2015

03.03.2016

The Appellant in this Appeal has sought to impugn the Judgment of

the learned High Court Judge of Anuradhapura dated 29.06.2005 wherein

the learned High Court Judge had dismissed the Petition of the Appellant.

The Appellant had instituted the action No. 5212003/Writ in the High

Court of Anuradhapura, seeking to quash the document dated 25.11.2003

marked as 'Pll' issued by the 2nd Respondent. The said notice had been

sent under the Urban Development Authority Act No. 41 of 1978 as

amended by Act No. 44 of 1984.

After considering the submissions made by both parties the learned

High Court Judge dismissed the Appellant's application. Being aggrieved

by the said Judgment the Appellant has preferred this Appeal praying for

annulling of the said Judgment.

The case was scheduled for argument on 15.10.2015. Only the

Counsel for the 1 st and 2nd Respondents was present and the Appellant was

absent and unrepresented on that day, although the Appellant had been

represented by a Counsel previously. In the circumstances submissions were

made on behalf of the 1 st and 2nd Respondents only.

"

4

The Appellant had made the application to the High Court of

Anuradhapura, for a Writ of Certiorari to quash the notice marked as 'P 11'

to the Petition. He averred that the 2nd Respondent, acting in excess or abuse

of his powers and motivated by political and other extraneous reasons, was

taking steps to demolish his building.

The 1 st and 2nd Respondents filing their objections had stated in their

affidavits, that to remove the unauthorised buildings within the town limit

of Anuradhapura are subject to the control.

In the case of Biso Menika vs. C.R. De Alwis (S.C. 59/61),

Sharvananda J. (as he was then) stated, " a Writ of Certiorari is issued at the

discretion of the Court. It cannot be held to be a Writ of right or one issued

as a matter of course" .

The exercise of this discretion by Court is governed by certain well

accepted principles. The fundamental principal is that the rights of a person

would have been affected by any decision or determination for the Court to

consider. A Petitioner seeking a prerogative writ is not entitled to relief as a

matter of course, as a matter of right or as a matter of routine.

Halsbury, Volume 11 Pages 85 and 86, Simonds Edition:- "The grant

of a Writ is as a general Rule, a matter of discretion of the Court. It is not an

order granted as of a right and it is not issued as a matter of course.

Accordingly, the Court may refuse the order, not only upon the merits but

also by reason of the special circumstances of the case (Halsbury's Laws of

England).

5

It is relevant to note, that the facts emerged in this case do not show,

that the 1 st and 2nd Respondents have acted in excess of their legal authority

affecting the rights of the Appellant. The Appellant has not submitted to

Court or shown any illegality or procedural irregularity in sending the said

notice marked 'P 11'.

Hence, I am of the view, that the 1 st and 2nd Respondents have acted

correctly and legally within their power and the Appellant is therefore not

entitled for the reliefs prayed for in the Petition.

On perusal of the Judgment, it is apparent, that the learned High Court

Judge has taken into consideration of the affidavits and documents filed by

the parties and had come to his conclusion. As such I do not see any wrong

in the manner in which the learned High Court Judge has considered the

facts and the way in which he has applied the law in this instance.

For the above reasons, I see no basis to interfere with the Judgment of

the learned High Court Judge.

Accordingly, I affirm the Judgment of the learned High Court Judge

dated 29.06.2005, and dismiss the appeal with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

P.R.Walgama, J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Appeal is dismissed