Page 1 of 16

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of section

331 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act

No- 15 of 1979, read with Article 138 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

CA/HCC/0250/2018 COMPLAINANT

Vs.

High Court of Colombo Selvakumar Sathyaleela alias Sathya

Case No: HC/3861/2007 ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

The Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo

COMPLAINANT-APPELLANT

Vs.

Selvakumar Sathyaleela alias Sathya

ACCUSED-RESPONDENT

Page 2 of 16

Before : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

: P. Kumararatnam, J.

Counsel : Azard Nawavi, DSG for the Complainant-Appellant

: Rienzie Arsecularatne, P.C. with S. Rathnawel,

Chamindri Arsecularatne, Ramitha Gnanaraj and

Thilina Punchihewa for the Accused- Respondent

Argued on : 22-11-2022

Written Submissions : 07-04-2021 (By the Accused- Respondent)

: 16-12-2019 (By the Complainant-Appellant)

Decided on : 23-01-2023

Sampath B Abayakoon, J.

This is an appeal by the complainant appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

appellant) on being aggrieved of the judgment dated 16-01-2018 and the

sentence of even date by the learned High Court Judge of Colombo.

The appellant, acting under the powers vested in him as the Attorney General

of the Republic, filed the indictment relevant to the appeal under consideration

as a direct indictment in terms of section 3(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure (Special Provisions) Act No. 15 of 2005.

The charges preferred against the accused respondent (hereinafter referred to

as the respondent) are as follows;

(1) During the period between 01-03-2004 to 07-07-2004 the accused

respondent committed conspiracy or abatted along with the now

deceased Thayagaraja Jayarani and people unknown to the

prosecution to commit the murder of Douglas Devananda, which is in

an offence punishable with death. However, since the murder of the

Page 3 of 16

said Douglas Devananda did not occur, the accused respondent

committed an offence read with section 113(A), section 108 and

section 296 of the Penal Code and punishable accordingly.

(2) At the same time and at the same transaction the accused respondent

abatted the now deceased Thayagaraja Jayarani and people unknown

to the prosecution to commit the murder of Douglas Devananda,

which in an offence punishable with death, and since the said murder

did not occur, she committed an offence punishable with section 296,

read with section 108 of the Penal Code.

(3) In the same transaction as mentioned in the above charges, and on or

about 07-07-2004, the accused aided and abetted the earlier

mentioned Jayarani to commit the murder of Police Inspector

Ekanayaka at Kollupitiya and thereby committed an offence

punishable in terms of section 296 read with section 104 of the Penal

Code.

(4) In the same transaction as mentioned in the above charges, and on or

about 07-07-2004, the accused aided and abetted the earlier

mentioned Jayarani to commit the murder of Police Sergeant 411

Artigala at Kollupitiya and thereby committed an offence punishable

in terms of section 296 read with section 104 of the Penal Code.

(5) In the same transaction as mentioned in the above charges, and on or

about 07-07-2004, the accused aided and abetted the earlier

mentioned Jayarani to commit the murder of one Bonifes Liyanage at

Kollupitiya and thereby committed an offence punishable in terms of

section 296 read with section 104 of the Penal Code.

(6) In the same transaction as mentioned in the above charges, and on or

about 07-07-2004, the accused aided and abetted the earlier

mentioned Jayarani to commit the murder of one Kasthuri Badal at

Kollupitiya and thereby committed an offence punishable in terms of

section 296 read with section 104 of the Penal Code.

Page 4 of 16

Initially, the date of offence mentioned in the indictment in relation to the 3rd to

6th counts had been 4th July 2004, which has been duly amended on 9th

November 2009 by the prosecution with the permission of the Court to read as

7th July 2004.

After trial, the learned High Court Judge of Colombo found the respondent

guilty for the 2nd count preferred against her and she was acquitted of the other

charges.

Accordingly, she was sentenced for a period of 24 months rigorous

imprisonment suspended for 15 years. In addition, she was ordered to pay a

fine of Rs. 25,000/-, in default 12 months simple imprisonment.

It appears that the respondent was so sentenced having considered the fact

that the respondent was in remand custody for thirteen years, which was six

years over the maximum period of the sentence that can be imposed on a

person found guilty for an offence in terms of section 108 of the Penal Code,

which was the penal provision under which the respondent was found guilty.

The appellant has filed this appeal on the basis that the learned High Court

Judge was misdirected when the respondent was acquitted of the 1st, 3rd, 4th,

5th and the 6th counts preferred against her, and the sentence imposed on the

respondent for the count where she was found guilty was wholly inadequate

given the seriousness of the crime for which she was found guilty.

The facts that led to the indictment against the respondent, briefly, are as

follows;

On the day of this incident, namely, on 7th July 2004, the respondent has

accompanied Thaygaraja Jayarani mentioned in the indictment to the Colombo

office of the Eelam Peoples Democratic Party (EPDP), whose leader was Mr.

Douglas Devananda, a government minister at that time. Both the respondent

and the earlier mentioned Jayarani has gained access to the office in the

pretext of meeting the minister. The respondent was known to the minister as

Page 5 of 16

well as the persons who worked at the party office as she too has been working

at the EPDP Jaffna office previously and was also a party supporter.

As for the security procedures of the office, when the security personnel

attempted to body check Jayarani, she has refused to be searched sighting

shyness for such a check.

Because of the suspicions arose due to this, the said Jayarani has been

handed over to police for further investigations and taken to the Kollupitiya

police station. At the police station, she has detonated a suicide bomb she was

wearing which killed herself, and the four persons relevant to the 3rd to 6th

charges mentioned in the indictment, while several others also received

injuries.

After this incident, the respondent has been promptly arrested. She has been

produced before the Colombo Fort Magistrate, on the following day, where she

has given a statement to the Magistrate in terms of section 127 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

At the hearing of this appeal, it was the contention of the learned Deputy

Solicitor General (DSG) for the appellant that the learned High Court Judge has

well considered the facts and the relevant law and had reached right

conclusions in that regard until the learned High Court Judge was misdirected

in his final conclusions in the operative part of the judgment.

Citing the evidence led at the trial and the reasoning in the judgment he

brought to the notice of the Court that it has been determined that the

respondent, along with the deceased Jayarani and other members of the

terrorist movement Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) has conspired with

the common purpose of assassinating minister Devananda, although the said

task failed. It has also been determined that the respondent aided and abetted

in the commission of the offence knowingly.

Page 6 of 16

The learned DSG Pointed to the fact that the respondent who has given

evidence in this action under oath, has admitted or has not challenged most of

the evidence led at the trial, other than claiming that she had no knowledge

that Jayarani was a suicide bomber and she accompanied her to meet the

minister due to a chance meeting of her near the EPDP office.

Disagreeing with the conclusions of the learned High Court Judge as to the

reasons for finding the respondent not guilty for the 1st count preferred against

her, it was the submission of the learned DSG that the learned trial judge was

misdirected when it was determined that section 108 of the Penal Code has no

application for the facts of the matter. He was also of the view that there was

ample basis for the learned trial judge to act under section 177 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Code if it was the case, as such an action would not have

caused any prejudice to the respondent. It was his view that the 1st count

preferred against that appellant was correct and there was evidence beyond

reasonable doubt against the respondent in that regard, as correctly

determined by the learned High Court Judge.

Commenting on the basis upon which the respondent has been acquitted of the

3rd,4th,5th, and the 6th counts, it was his submission that the determination

that detonating a suicide bomb at the Kollupitiya police station was not a

result of the respondent aiding and abating Jayarani to assassinate minster

Devananda, but an unexpected event for the respondent, was also a total

misdirection. He pointed out that the said incident occurred as a direct result

of the conspiracy and the aiding and abating of the respondent to commit the

crime of assassinating the Minister. He was of the view that there was

sufficient evidence before the Court to convict the respondent for the said

counts as well.

Under the circumstances, the learned DSG urged the Court to set aside the

acquittal of the respondent and convict her for all the charges preferred against

her and to sentence her accordingly.

Page 7 of 16

He pointed out further that giving the respondent a suspended sentence on the

basis of her long incarceration was not warranted given the seriousness of the

crime committed by her.

The learned Presidents Counsel making submissions on behalf of the

respondent, defended the judgment and the sentence of the learned High Court

Judge on the basis that determinations reached by the learned trial judge were

correct and need no disturbance from this Court.

Commenting on the acquittal of the respondent from the 1st count it was his

view that if the prosecution chose to charge the respondent for the conspiracy

where there is a separate penal provision or to base the charge on the basis of

section 102 instead of section 108 of the Penal Code, a conviction could have

been sustained. He submitted that the learned High Court Judges

determination that the said charge has been wrongly formulated and amending

the charge at the stage of the judgment in terms of section 167 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Code will cause prejudice to the respondent was a correct

decision.

He made further submissions in line with the learned High Court Judges view

that the incident at the Kollupitiya police station cannot be attributed to the

respondent on the basis of conspiracy and aiding abating to the crime.

He moved for the dismissal of the appeal by the appellant arguing that it has

no merit, and for an order affirming the judgment and the sentence imposed by

the learned High Court Judge.

As I have considered earlier, this is a case where the learned High Court Judge

has determined that all the relevant facts as elicited by way of evidence by the

prosecution have been proved beyond reasonable doubt, and a case where the

defence put forward by the respondent has been rejected.

Page 8 of 16

I find no reason to disagree with the said determinations be the learned High

Court Judge as they have been reached after well considering and analyzing

the evidence in its totality with sound reasoning.

The reason for the acquittal of the respondent of the 1st count preferred against

her had been on the basis that the said charge against her was defective. The

learned High Court Judge has reason out the said determination in the

following manner.

108 .

7

.

108

.

.

01 113() 108

296 . 113 ()

.

108

. . 108

.

. 01 .

The above reasoning shows that it has been determined that there cannot be a

conspiracy to not to commit an offence as in terms of section 108 of the Penal

Code.

Page 9 of 16

As the learned High Court Judge has correctly held that there was a conspiracy

to assassinate minister Devananda and the respondent was part of the

conspiracy and she aided and abated in order to achieve that purpose and that

attempt failed, I find it unnecessary to consider the legal principles governing

the offences of conspiracy and the abatement any further.

However, I find it necessary to consider and interpret the section 108 of the

Penal Code, as it was the basis for the acquittal of the respondent of the 1st

count preferred against her.

Section 108 of the Penal code reads as follows;

108. Whoever abates the commission of an offence punishable with

death shall, if that offence be not committed in consequence of the

abatement, and no express provision is made by this Code for the

punishment of such abatement, be punished with imprisonment of

either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and

shall also be liable to fine;

And if any act for which the abator is liable in consequent of the

abatement, and which causes hurt to any person, is done, the abator

shall be liable to imprisonment of either description for a term

which may extend to fourteen years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Illustration

A instigates B to murder Z. The offence is not committed. If B

murdered Z he would have been subject to the punishment of

death. Therefore, A is liable to imprisonment for a term which

may extend to seven years, and also fine; and if any hurt is

done to Z in consequent of the abetment, he will be liable to

imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years,

and a fine.

Page 10 of 16

I am of the view that the primary basis upon which a charge can be formulated

under this section is the abatement for a commission of an offence and nothing

else. Section 113A of the Penal Code, which provides the definition of the

offence conspiracy has been mentioned in order to better explain the charge

that the abatement was a result of the conspiracy to assassinate Minister

Devananda. Therefore, I find no basis for the contention that there should have

been a separate charge of conspiracy.

When it comes to the contention that the defect in the charge was the failure to

mention section 102 as the punishable section rather than 108, I find it

necessary to draw the attention to section 164 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 which refers the basic requisites of a charge.

The said section reads as follows;

164.

(1) Every charge under this code shall state the offence with

which the accused is charged.

(2) If the law which creates the offence gives it any specific

name, the offence may be described in the charge by that

name only.

(3) If the law which creates the offence does not give it any

specific name, so much of the definition of the offence must

be stated as will give the accused notice of the matter with

which he is charged.

(4) The law and the section of the law under which the offence

said to have been committed is punishable shall be mentioned

in the charge.

(5) The fact that the charge is made is equivalent to a

statement that every legal condition required by law to

Page 11 of 16

constitute the offence charged was fulfilled in the particular

case.

(6) The charge shall when it preferred, whether at the inquiry

preliminary to committal for trial or at the trial. Be read to

the accused in a language which he understands.

I am of the view that a careful reading of the section and the illustration

provided, would amply demonstrate that the 1st count preferred against the

respondent was in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act.

The offence of conspiracy and abatement has been clearly mentioned and

described so that the respondent could understand the basis upon which she

has been charged, since the intended purpose of the actions of the respondent,

which was the murder of Minister Devananda was not achieved. I find that the

prosecution has correctly charged the respondent in terms of section 108,

mentioning it as the punishable section.

I find that the learned High Court Judge has well described the purpose of

section 108 of the Penal Code in paragraph 71.1 of his judgment. However, I

am in no position to agree with the learned High Court Judges determination

that a conspiracy cannot take place to not to do something punishable with

death, and therefore, the 1st count preferred against the respondent was

defective.

The learned High Court Judge has well considered the evidence and has

correctly determined that there was a conspiracy to murder minister

Devananda and the respondent was part of the that and she aided and abated

in order to achieve that purpose. After determining so, there cannot be

justification in stating that section 108 does not cover a situation where a

conspiracy to not to do something. Section 108 is a section based on

abatement and not on conspiracy.

Page 12 of 16

It needs to be noted that section 108 of the Penal Code envisages a situation

where a person abates the omission of an offence punishable with death, but

not committed in consequence of the abatement for some reason.

In the instant action, the abatement has been to murder, which has not

occasioned due to the failure of the attempt, hence, the respondent cannot be

convicted for murder based on her abatement. I am of the view that under the

circumstances, charging her in terms of section 108 was the only option.

Accordingly, I hold that the learned High Court Judge was misdirected as to

the 1st count preferred against the respondent when it was determined that the

said count was defective, in acquitting the respondent of count one.

The 3rd, 4th, 5th, and the 6th counts preferred against the respondent, for which

she was acquitted, were counts based on the deaths occurred at the Kollupitiya

police station when the suicide bomber Jayarani detonated the bomb she was

wearing. The said counts are counts that had been formulated in terms of

sections 104 and 296 of the Penal Code.

As considered by the learned High Court Judge the relevant section 104 of the

Penal Code reads as follows;

104. When an act is abated and a different act is done, the abettor is

liable to the act done, in the same manner and to the same extent

as if he had directly abetted it:

Provided the act done was the probable consequence of the

abatement, and was committed under the influence of the

instigation, or with the aid or in pursuance of the conspiracy which

constituted the abatement.

Page 13 of 16

After considering the provisions of section 104, the learned High Court Judge

has given his reasons to acquit the respondent in the following manner.

.

.

.

3,4,5,6 .

.

. 3,4,5,6

.

3,4,5,6 .

It appears from the above reasoning that the learned High Court Judge has

concluded that because the respondent has only aided and abated to

assassinate Minister Devananda, the detonating of the bomb by the suicide

bomber Jayarani at the police station was a thing that the respondent could

not have anticipated under any circumstances, hence, the respondent bears no

criminal responsibility for the deaths of the four persons mentioned in the

respective charges.

I am unable to find a basis to agree with this view either. It is clear that the act

abated was to assassinate Minister Devananda, but a different act has been

done in consequent to it, which led to the death of four persons. Anyone who

chose to wear a suicide bomb in order to commit the murder of a person, or an

abettor for that matter, knows for sure that when it is detonated, not only the

intended target but serval others including the carrier of the bomb may die as a

result. In this instant, the intended purpose has not been fulfilled because of

the arrest of the mentioned Jayarani. When she was taken to the police station,

Page 14 of 16

she and the respondent shall know that the bomb has to be detonated at some

point as there would be no escape. It is therefore, clear that the act done was a

probable consequence of the abatement and was committed under the

influence of the instigation, which is an act falls within the ambit of the section

104 of the Penal Code.

Both the respondent and the mentioned Jayarani had the required knowledge

that their actions were so dangerous that it must in all probabilities cause

death, which falls within the definition of murder in terms of section 294 of the

Penal Code.

For matters of clarity, I think it is appropriate to reproduce the fourth limb of

section 294 which reads thus;

294. Except in the cases hereinafter excepted, culpable homicide is

murder-

Fourthly- IF the person committing the act knows that it is so

imminently dangerous that it must in all probability cause death, or

such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, and commits such act

without any excuse for incurring the risk of causing death or such

injury as aforesaid.

For the reasons as stated above, I am of the view that the learned High Court

Judge was misdirected in law when it was determined that the respondent

should stand acquitted of the 1st, 3rd, 4th ,5th, and the 6th counts preferred

against her.

Accordingly, I set aside the acquittal of the respondent of the said counts and

convict her for the said counts as well, in terms of the powers vested in this

Court by section 337 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

Page 15 of 16

Although this was a matter not argued during the appeal, I am of the view that

the 2nd counts should be a count that needs to be considered as an alternative

count to the 1st count preferred against the respondent for the purposes of

sentencing, as both the counts refer to the one and the same incident. I am of

the view that the 1st count was a count based on the conspiracy and the

abatement, while the 2nd was a count based only on the abatement.

Hence, I set aside the sentence imposed upon the respondent on the 2nd count

and sentence her as below.

On count one, I sentence her to five years rigorous imprisonment and to a fine

of Rs. 25000/-. In default of paying the fine, she shall serve a period of six-

month simple imprisonment.

On count two, I make no sentencing order on the basis that this needs to be

considered as an alternative count to the 1st count preferred against her, for

which she was sentenced.

On count three, the respondent is sentenced to death.

On count four, the respondent is sentenced to death.

On count five, the respondent is sentenced to death.

On count six, the respondent is sentenced to death.

The learned High Court Judge of Colombo is directed to follow the necessary

procedural steps as required by law, before the pronouncement of the sentence

of death on the respondent.

Page 16 of 16

The learned High Court Judge is also directed to issue a warrant of arrest of

the respondent at the first instant, if it becomes necessary for the proper

implementation of this judgment and the sentence.

Appeal allowed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal