1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Court Appeal Case No. CA 1185/99 (F)

District Court of Ratnapura Case No. 13380/RE

In the matter of an application (for rehearing the appeal) under Section 771 read with Sections 769 and 839 of the Civil Procedure Code.

Kuruwita Multi-Purpose Corporative Society Ltd. Kuruwita

VS.

J. Shaul Hameed No. 07, Main Street Kuruwita

PLAINTIFF

DEFENDANT

AND NOW

Kuruwita Multi-Purpose Corporative Society Ltd. Kuruwita

PLAINTIFF-APPELLANT

VS.

J. Shaul Hameed No. 07, Main Street Kuruwita

DEFENDANT RESPONDENT

BEFORE

COUNSEL

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS TENDERED ON

DECIDED ON

M. M. A. GAFFOOR, J.

M. M. A. GAFFOOR, J.

Upul Kumarapperuma with Bhagya Peiris for the Plaintiff-Appellant

T.D. Aluthnuwara for the Defendant-Respondent

Plaintiff-Appellant -24.01.2018 Defendant-Respondent - 11.06.2018

16.10.2018

***

2

This is an Appeal against the Order (dated 09.11.1999) of the Learned District

Judge of Ratnapura. The Plaintiff-Appellant, Kuruwita Multi-Purpose Co-

operative Society Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as the 'Appellant') instituted an

action in the District Court against the Defendant-Respondent (hereinafter

referred to as the 'Respondent') in September, 1996 to eject the Respondent

from the premises more fully described in the schedule to the Plaint.

According to the Appellant, the said Land and premises in question had been

rented out by the Appellant Society to the Respondent's father in 1978 and the

Respondent later became the successor to his father and occupied the said

premises at the time of institution of the above mentioned action. It is the claim of

the Appellant Society that the said rent agreement between the former

management of the Society and the Respondent was illegal.

3

The case was called in the District Court of Ratnapura on several occasions.

When it was taken up for trial and on 16th July 1998, the Appellant Society was

not present before the Court, the Counsel of the Appellant informed the court that

he had no instructions. Then counsel for the Respondent moved court to

dismiss the case. Accordingly, the learned District Judge dismissed the above

action on the ground of non-appearance of the Appellant. (Vide page 09 in the

appeal brief)

Thereafter, the Appellant filed a Petition dated 30th July 1998 along with an

affidavit (vide page at 33-34 in the brief) and made an application to the District

Court in terms of section 87(3) of the Civil Procedure Code to set aside the order

dated 16.07.1998 and restore the Appellant's action.

After inquiry, on 09.11.1996 the learned District Judge has rejected the

Appellant's application on the basis that the Appellant has failed to satisfy the

Court that there were reasonable grounds for the non-appearance of the plaintiff.

(Page 54-59)

Being aggrieved by the said judgment the Appellant Society mad an appeal

before this court to vacate the order of the learned Judge dated 09.11.1999

and to re-list the said matter for trial.

The matter was already taken up before His Lordship H.N.J. Perera, J. and the

order was reserved by him, pending that order His Lordship was elevated to the

Supreme Court. Therefore counsel for the Respondent pleaded that the matter

be relisted for arguments. Accordingly, the matter was reargued on 29th

November 2017 and granted permission to file written submissions.

The Written Submission on behalf the Appellant and the Respondent were filed

on 24.01.2018 and 11.06.2018 respectively.

4

In this appeal, the Appellant's position was that representative of the Appellant's

Society (General Manager, Mrs. Padma Gamlath) could not attend in the District

Court trial as she had to attend a domestic inquiry on the same day which was

held upon the direction of an order made by the High court in case No. HCRIAR

203/97. The Appellant further submitted that on the date of the trial (16.07.1998)

the Attorney for the Appellant appeared before the learned District Judge and

informed that he had no instruction from the Appellant.

Therefore, Appellant further argued that the appearances of the Instructing

Attorney has to be counted not because his appearance or but because of being

the proxy holder of the relevant party.

But the Respondent has taken up his position that the representative of the

Appellant could not appear in court on the day of trial because she forgot the

date and time of the trial; therefore, counsel for the Respondent argued that

Appellant's non-appearance was solely due to their negligence.

The Counsel for the Respondent further submitted that,

The High Court order in case No. HCRIAR 203/97 did not refer that the

inquiry should be held on the specific date and it was at the sole discretion

of the Appellants to decide the dates of such inquiry.

The Appellant has forgotten the District Court trial altogether and has not

acted in due diligence on the date of the trial.

The appellant had a choice to attend the court if she really wanted to. And

even after she remembered the trial, she has given priority to the domestic

inquiry -non judicial forum over the District Court trial. (Vide Written

Submissions of the Respondent)

5

Learned District Judge also had agreed with these submissions and took two

main views for his discernment,

1. The Plaintiff-Appellant was not acted in a serious manner to attend the

trial or she neglected.

(Vide pages 55 & 56 in the appeal brief - Judgment)

2. She did not give any instruction for her counsel hence the Counsel for

the Appellant appeared before the learned District Judge and addressed

that he had no instruction from the Appellant.

Therefore the learned District Judge came to a conclusion that there are no

reasonable grounds for the non-appearance of the Appellant.

The relevant provision with regard to non-appearance of a Plaintiff is contained in

Section 87 of the Civil Procedure Code. It's vital to consider the entire sections of

non-appearance though in this problem attention need to be focused only to

Section 87(3) of the code. Section 87 reads thus:

(1) Where the plaintiff or where both the plaintiff and the defendant make default in appearing on the day fixed for the trial, the court shall dismiss the plaintiff's action.

(2) Where an action has been dismissed under this section, the plaintiff shall be precluded from bringing a fresh action in respect of the same cause of action.

(3) The plaintiff may apply within a reasonable time from the date of dismissal, by way of petition supported by affidavit, to have the dismissal set aside, and if on the hearing of such application, of which the defendant shall be given notice, the court is satisfied that there were reasonable grounds for the non-appearance of the plaintiff, the court shall make order setting aside the dismissal upon such terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit, and shall appoint a day for proceeding with the action as from the stage at which the dismissal for default was made.

6

The requirement as in Section 87(3) of the Code is to apply to court within a

reasonable time and satisfy court that there were reasonable grounds for non-

appearance. Then the standard of proof as in Section 87(3) is only reasonable

grounds unlike 'sufficient cause' or 'good cause'.

On this rudimentary scenario, I would like to examine the evidence at the inquiry

and the order of the learned District Judge that whether the Appellant has a

reasonable cause or not.

The Appellant in her evidence (examination in-chief) stated that, she knew that

she had to come to court that day and the domestic inquiry started at 8.30am on

16.07.1998 and that she intended to come to court after testifying before the

domestic inquiry. She further stated that that it was due to any sort of negligence

on her part. Nevertheless, in her cross examination it was revealed that she

actually forgot that she was to be present in court that day and she remembered

it only around 9.00am.

The learned District Court judge was attentive on this. (Page - 03 of the

judgement, 56 of the appeal brief)

9: e'l2l5) 25:\' ~ ?

c: 9~h~ ~e:>el 2S)25:\' ~e'zf.

9: e'l2l5)25:\'~, 2S)~e:> z53~@2S) @e:>, ~2S)e'2l5)lE) qle'!:) 2S)1. ~~tD qle'!:) ~tde'd

q2S)2l5) ~ ~~l. qle'!:) ~tde'd q2S)2l5) ~ ~~l ~zf ~ ?

c: ~!:).

9: ~2l5) ~S 153~!:) ~2S)d~d e'~ ~~~~ e'~d~~ ?

c: 52S)'" ~B25:\'~",E) ~tDtDlG3 ~ ~~l, ~zf2S) Q)tO~2S)l s,C!)) ~~e:>l.

7

According to her evidence, it's crystal clear that even after she remembered the

trial, she has given priority to a non - judicial forum (domestic inquiry) over the

District Court trial. Also it's seems to me that if she care / attentive on the trial she

could arrange or authorise another person on behalf of her.

Further the learned District Judge carefully considered that whether the

Appellant's non-appearance was actually due to the reasons stated in the petition

and affidavit or not. It's obviously clear from the judgment of the District Court

that the evidence of the General Manger of Cooperative Society herself and the

Education Officer, both of whom were witnesses of the Appellant, contradicted

the position taken up by the appellant in the petition and the affidavit. (Vide page

58 of in the brief)

Even, The Appellant is in a position with the decision of Isek Fernando Vs. Ritta

Fernando and others (1999) 3 S.L.R. 29 that there was an appearance by the

Registered Attorney-at-Law for the Appellant and has marked his appearance as

the Attorney-at-Law for the Appellant. In my view the present case not only

questioned the appearance of an Attorney or the Appellant; the Appellant did not

give any instruction or any other excuse through the attorney; The Attorney-at-

Law informed court just as "I have no instruction from the Plaintiff

(Appellant)" .

As held in Packiyanathan vs. Singarajah (1991) 2 S.L.R. 205, If the act of an

attorney or plaintiff is mere mistake can generally be excused; but not

negligence, especially continuing negligence. The decision will depend upon the

facts and circumstances of each case.

In Kathirasu Vs Sinniah 71 N.L.R. 450: HNG Fernando, C. J. observed that,

where a Proctor and his client (the plaintiff) were absent on the trial date because

the Proctor had by mistake taken down the date of trial as 18th of August, when

in fact the trial was fixed for 10th of August. The Supreme Court held that the

8

decree nisi which was entered in this case on account of the non-appearance

should be set aside.

However, I am in a view that the facts of the instant case are not favourable to

the Appellant than that of the above case. The conduct of the Appellant and his

Attorney-at-Law cannot be excused and the appellant had failed to adduce

sufficient cause for a rehearing of the appeal.

Furthermore, there does not seem to be a material defect or error in the order of

the learned District Judge. The Trial Court Judge's finding on very many primary

facts need not be altered by this court. As held in Alwis vs. Piyasena Fernando

(1993) 1 S.l.R. 119, generally an Appellate Court would not interfere with

primary facts unless such findings are highly unacceptable or without proper

reasons.

In all the above circumstances and for the above reasons, I affirm the Judgment

of the learned District Judge dated 09.11.1999; and dismiss the appeal with cost.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL