IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

In the matter of an appeal made in terms of Article 154P(6) read with Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

W.M. Ranjith Wimalasiri Wijethunga, Residential Project Manager, Victoria Project, Mahaweli Autority, Digana.

PETITIONER. CA. (PHC) No. 185/2013 P.H.C.Kandy No. Rev. 49/2012 M.CTeldeniya No. 6591

!

Vs.

K.M.N. Kulasekera, No.383/1, Park Road, Teldeniya.

*****************

RESPONENT.

K.M.N. Kulasekera, No.383/1, Park Road, Teldeniya. RESPONENT -PETITIONER.

Vs. W.M. Ranjith Wimalasiri Wijethunga, Residential Project Manager, Victoria Project, Mahaweli Autority, Digana. APPLICANT -RESPONDENT

1

And now between

W.M. Ranjith Wimalasiri Wijethunga, Residential Project Manager, Victoria Project, Mahaweli Autority, Digana. APPLICANT -RESPONDENT-PETITIONER.

Vs. K.M.N. Kulasekera, No.383/1, Park Road, Teldeniya. RESPONDENT -PETITIONER-RESPONENT.

************

BEFORE

COUNSEL

JANAK DE SILVA, J. &

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

Indula Ratnayake S.C. for the Applicant-

Respondent-Petitioner.

Lal Wijenayake for the Respondent-Petitioner-

Respondent.

ARGUED ON 03rd May,2018

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

BY BOTH PARTIES

TENDERED ON

DECICED ON

14th May, 2018

25th May, 2018

*************

2

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The Applicant-Respondent-Petitioner (hereafter referred to as the

"Petitioner"), by invocation of the appellate jurisdiction of this Court,

seeks to set aside the order dated 20th November 2013 of the Provincial

High Court holden at Kandy.

The Provincial High Court, in exercising its revisionary jurisdiction,

has set aside an order of eviction issued by the Magistrate's Court of

Teldeniya on 13th March 2012 under Section 5 of the State Lands (Recovery

of Possession) Act No.7 of 1979 (hereafter referred to as the" Act").

Upon perusal of the proceedings before both Courts, it is evident

that the Petitioner has issued a notice to quit on the Respondent-Petitioner-

Respondent (hereafter referred to as the "Respondent") on 23rd August

2011 and has displayed it on the State land described in the schedule to the

said notice. Thereafter, the Petitioner instituted proceedings in the

Magistrate's Court of Teldeniya, seeking an order of eviction against the

Respondent, under Section 5 of the said Act.

After an inquiry, in which the parties were duly represented, the

Magistrate's Court has issued an order of eviction on the Respondent. The

Respondent has thereafter sought to revise the said order of eviction by

invoking revisionary jurisdiction of the Provincial High Court. He was

3

successful in his endeavour as the Provincial High Court ,by its order

dated 4th December 2013, has set aside the order of eviction.

Aggrieved by the said order of the Provincial High Court, the

Petitioner lodged an appeal seeking intervention of this Court to set aside

the said order of the Provincial High Court.

At the hearing of this appeal, learned State Counsel who appeared

for the Petitioner submitted that the Respondent has failed to tender a

valid permit or other written authority of the State, which was not revoked

or otherwise rendered invalid before the Magistrate's Court and therefore

the learned Magistrate has, in compliance of the statutory provisions of the

said Act, issued the order of eviction.

However, the learned High Court Judge, after considering the claim

of the Respondent that he is in possession of the portion of the State land

described in the schedule, on behalf of its permit holder Kankanamlage

Gamini Sarachchandra, has erroneously concluded that it is unjust to evict

the Respondent without making the said Kankanamlage Gamini

Sarachchandraa party to the case.

It has also considered the fact that the said Sarachchandra had been

issued with a permit to the land and upon that he has already constructed

a house on the said land at a cost of over Rs. 3 Million.

Learned State Counsel contended that the Provincial High Court has

considered extraneous factors in revising the order of the Magistrate's

Court and therefore the impugned order of the Provincial High Court

ought to be set aside.

4

In his reply, learned Counsel for the Respondent submitted that he

was placed in possession of the said allotment of State land by

Sarachchandra who had a valid permit. It is stressed that the attempt made

by Sarachchandra to intervene in the proceedings before the Magistrate's

Court was unsuccessful. It is submitted that the said refusal of his

application to intervene was founded upon several adverse findings,

which in turn were made without giving an opportunity for the permit

holder to present his case. According to the Respondent, this is an instance

of violation of rules of natural justice.

He further submitted that Sarachchandra was given a permit on the

condition that if he constructed a house within 6 months, he is entitled to

have a long lease to the possession of the said State land. He claims that he

has satisfied this requirement and there is no document to prove the fact

that the permit issued to him was cancelled.

Learned High Court Judge, in allowing the application of the

Respondent to revise the order of eviction issued by the Magistrate's

Court, concluded that the Petitioner has failed to name Sarachchandra as a

party and thereby depriving him of an opportunity to tender the permit is

unjust.

He also relied on the reasoning of the judgment of the Supreme

Court in Appeal No. 138/96 in support of his conclusion that allowing the

Petitioner to enforce the eviction order, would have caused Sarachchandra

grave prejudice, since he (Sarachchandra) has paid the lease payments up to

31st October 2006, in respect of the said State land.

5

Thus, it is clear that the Provincial High Court has decided to

exercise its revisionary jurisdiction over the order of eviction on these two

grounds.

There is no dispute that the land described in the schedule to the

application filed by the Petitioner before the Magistrate's Court is a State

land. It is also not disputed that Sarachchandra was issued with a permit in

relation to the said State land with certain conditions attached. The

Respondent has received the quit notice issued by the Petitioner and has

replied to it through his Attorney (X7). In the said reply the Respondent

informed that Sarachchandra is the licensee for the said land and if any legal

action is contemplated, it should be instituted against the said licensee.

In view of these factors, it is evident that at the time of the service of

quit notice, it was the Respondent who was in possession of the said State

land. It is also evident that the Respondent had no "valid permit or other

written authority of the State granted in accordance with any written law"

to be in possession of the said State land. His claim is that he came into

possession with the leave and licence of Sarachchandra who had been

issued with a permit for the said State land and resided elsewhere when

the quit notice was served.

Therefore, the Respondent is clearly a person who is in

unauthorized possession or occupation of State land.

Section 3(1) of the Act imposes a duty on the Petitioner to provide

for a period not less than 30 days from the date on which the quit notice

was issued to comply with it. The quit notice is dated 23.08.2011 and the

Respondent was directed to handover vacant possession on or before

6

30.09.2011. The Petitioner has thereafter filed his application in the

Magistrate's Court of Teldeniya on 18.11.2011.

The Respondent did not at any point of time challenge the validity

of the said quit notice served on him and sought remedies available under

public law. In Dayananda v Thalwatte(2001) 2 Sri L.R. 73, this Court,

having observed that " an aggrieved person who is seeking to set aside an

unfavourable decision made against him by a public authority could apply for a

prerogative writ of certiorari and if the application is to compel an authority to

perform a duty he would ask for a writ of mandamus and similarly if an authority

is to be prevented from exceeding its jurisdiction the remedy of prohibition was

available" proceeded thereafter to hold that "institution of proceedings in the

Magistrates Court in terms of the quit notice is not a determination affecting

legal rights." It further held that "it was open for the Petitioner to seek to quash

the quit notice by way of certiorari when the determination was made ... or to

move in revision at the conclusions of the Magistrate's findings".

Thus, it is seen that the selection of the best remedy from these

options had to be made by the Respondent at the appropriate juncture and

the Courts would employ different considerations in evaluating claims

under these separate legal remedies. The considerations that might assume

importance in an application for the issuance of a prerogative writ, might

not be useful in an application made for a discretionary remedy such as

revision. The Provincial High Court has fallen into error in its failure to

appreciate this inherent distinction between the two distinct legal

remedies.

7

When an application is made under Section 5(1) of the Act, the

relevant Magistrate's Court is under a legal duty to issue summons on a

Respondent directing him to show cause as to why he should not be

ejected from the State land. Section 8(1) and 9(1) of the Act provides for the

situation that when such a Respondent appears before Court and states he

has cause to show to hold an inquiry.

However, the scope of such inquiry is limited by Section 9(1) to the

following, as decided by this Court in C.A.jPHC/41/2010 - C.A. minutes

of 31.01.2017;

"Under section 9 of the State Land (Recovery of

Possession) Act the scope of the inquiry is limited to for

the person noticed to establish that he is not in

unauthorized occupation or possession by establishing

that;

1. Occupying the land on a permit or a written authority.

2. It must be valid permit or a written authority.

3. It must be in force at the time of presenting it into Court.

4. It must have been issued in accordance with

any written law."

The Respondent, in an attempt to show cause, sought to tender a

permit issued to Sarachchandra annexed to his affidavit marked X-1 and

stated that he came to occupy the said State land with leave and license of

the said permit holder.

The permit, which was issued on 31.10.2005 for a period of one year,

could be revalidated upon making yearly payment of Rs. 12,000.00 to the

8

Petitioner. The receipt marked X-2 confirms that Sarachchandra has paid Rs.

36,000.00 on 31.05.2005. That would result in conferring validity to the

permit until 31.10.2006. The receipt was issued for payment of rent for the

year 2005 and the amount also included payments for unspecified "past

dues". As already noted, the quit notice is dated 23.08.2011 and the permit

has become an invalid document by then.

When considered in this light, the Respondent's claim of occupying

the State land with leave and license of Sarachchandra adds nothing to his

cause before the Magistrate's Court. Wording of Section 9(1) of the Act to

the effect that "such permit or authority is in force and not revoked or

otherwise rendered invalid" covers this type of situation. The validity of

the permit marked X-1, clearly has lapsed long before the quit notice was

issued or has" otherwise rendered invalid" by the failure to pay the annual

rent stipulated by the issuing authority.

It is thus clear that the issuance of the order of eviction by the

Magistrate's Court on the Respondent who occupied State land without

valid permit or authority has been validly made adopting statutorily

specified considerations.

The quit notice and the application for an order of eviction were

issued in respect of the Respondent who was in unauthorized possession

or occupation of State land. The fact that at an earlier point of time a permit

was issued to Sarachchandra has no relevance to the proceedings before the

Magistrate's Court. Clearly Sarachchandra was not in possession or

occupation of the said State land and when the Petitioner issued quit notice

on the Respondent and sought an order of his eviction, it made no

9

determination on the rights of Sarachchandra. Therefore, he is not a

necessary party to the proceedings before the Magistrate's Court.

In this respect, it is relevant to note that the Petitioner, In his

statement of objections, has averred that Sarachchandra never was in

possession of the said State land since granting of permit and he made no

application to extend validity of the permit after 31.10.2006. In addition,

Sarachchandra has acted in violation of some of the conditions stipulated in

the said permit as he has sublet the land to the Respondent and failed to

commence building on the land within the required six-month period.

However, it added that the building shown in the photographs was

constructed recently without obtaining proper prior approval and

therefore the permit holder was clearly in breach of the said conditions.

These assertions were not countered by the Respondent. That being

the position, it is abundantly clear that even if Sarachchandra was in

possession of the State land when the quit notice was issued by the

Respondent, he too was in unauthorized occupation or possession of the

said State land.

However, the basis on which the Provincial High Court allowed

Respondent's application needs further consideration.

It apparently considered that the payment of Rs. 36,000.00 as

payment of the annual rent for a three-year period. The receipt does not

indicate such a position. As already noted it described the payment as rent

for the year 2005 and also for unspecified past dues. The payment was

made on the same day on which the permit was issued. Since then there

was no payment of rent made either by Sarachchandra or by the

10

Respondent, who came to possess the land through him. This is a clear

indication of the status of Sarachchandra in relation to the permit since he

made only one payment and that too is for the 1st year of occupation of the

State land.

The judgment of the Supreme Court of S.c. Appeal No. 138/96

S.C.M. 26.02.1999, relied upon by the Provincial High Court to revise the

order of eviction, was made in an application for a prerogative writ. In that

matter, an application was made before the apex Court to quash the quit

notice issued on the applicant, in spite of making several payments. The

Supreme Court has quashed the impugned quit notice on the basis that the

competent authority has accepted payment for several years as rent for the

disputed portion of the State land by considering that the payment and

acceptance of rentals, it cannot be said that the appellants are in

"unauthorized possession or occupation" and therefore the quit notices are

"ultra vires, invalid and void in law".

It is unfortunate that the Provincial High Court did not appreciate

that the matter pending before it was a revision of proceedings instituted

under the Section 5(1) whereas the judgment of the Supreme Court dealt

with the validity of the quit notice in an application for a prerogative writ.

It is our considered view that the learned High Court Judge has

misapplied the reasoning of the Supreme Court to the revision application

before him.

In Nissanka v State(2001) 3 Sri L.R. 78, it was held that the power of

revision can be exercised for any of the following purposes viz;

11

1. to satisfy the Appellate Court as to the legality of any

sentence/ order,

2. to satisfy the Appellate Court as to the propriety of any

sentence/ order,

3. to satisfy the Appellate Court as to the regularity of the

proceedings of such Court.

The order of eviction issued by the Magistrate's Court is not tainted

with any of these considerations which makes it liable to be interfered with

and therefore, the Provincial High Court has fallen into error when it

decided to overturn it exercising revisionary jurisdiction.

Accordingly, we allow the appeal of the Petitioner by setting aside

the order of the Provincial High Court dated 20th November 2013.

No costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JANAK DE SILVA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

12