1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Court of Appeal Application No. C A (PHC) 129/2004

In the matter of an appeal in terms of section 154(P) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. Read with the Article 138 of the constitution of the Democratic Republic of Sri Lanka.

In the matter of an application in terms of section 66(1) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act No.44 of 1979.

Kalawana Circuit Magistrate Courts 1763 High Court Ratnapura Case No.HCRIRA 07/2004

Officer in Charge Police Station, Kalawana

PETITIONER

VS

1. Handuwalage Ruwani Nissansala

2. Handuwalage Sugathapala

3. Kuttapitiyage Mallika

Weddagala North, Weddagala, Kalawana.

RESPONDENTS

1. Handuwalage S ugathapala

.. 2

2. Kuttapitiyage Mallika

Weddagala North, Weddagala, Kalawana.

2nd, 3rd RESPONDENT-PETITIONERS

VS.

Handuwalage Ruwani Nissansala Weddagala North, Weddagala. Kalawana.

1st RESPONDENT- RESPONDENT

Now By and Between

1. Handuwalage S ugathapala

2. Kuttapitiyage Mallika

Weddagala North, Weddagala, Kalawana

2nd, 3rd RESPONDENT-PETITIONER-APPELLANT

Vs.

Handuwalage Ruwani Nissansala

Weddagala North, Weddagala, Kalawana

1 st RESPONDENT -RESPONDENT -RESPONDENT

BEFORE

COUNSEL:

Argued on

Decided on

3

W.M.M. Malini Gunaratne, J.

P.R. Walgama, J.

S.Gunawardena for the 1st Party Respondent-Respondent

Appellants absent and are unrepresented.

04/03/2015

01.06.2015

Malinie Gunaratne, J.

Pursuant to an information filed by Kalawana Police in terms of

Section 66 of the Primary Court Procedure Act the learned Primary Court

Judge of Kalawana held an inquiry into the dispute between 2nd, 3rd

Respondent Petitioners -Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellants) and 1 st Respondent-Respondent -Respondent (hereinafter

referred to as the Respondent) in respect of the land called Batahena, held

that the respondent was in possession of the land in dispute on the date of

filing the information and accordingly prohibited any interference by the

appellants.

Dissatisfied with that order the appellants filed an application in

revision in Ratnapura High Court which was dismissed on 10105/2004.

Thereafter they invoked the appellate jurisdiction of this Court seeking to set

aside the order of the High Court Ratnapura dated 10105/2004. However, it

is relevant to note that the petition of appeal do not contain any material to

show that the order of the learned High Court Judge is wrong and not valid in

law. It is significant to note that the appellants have not sought to set aside

4

the order dated 19/12/2002 made by the learned Primary Court Judge of

Kalawana. Hence, the order of the Primary Court Judge would prevail in

favour of the respondent and against the appellants.

This appeal was taken up for hearing in the absence of the appellants

on 04/03/2015. Learned Counsel for the Respondent contented, since the

appellants have not asked any substantive relief from this Court, the petition

of appeal is bad in law and has to be dismissed in limine.

It is pertinent to note that the pleadings of the appellants are in total

disarray and are ambiguous giving rise to the conclusion that draftsman of the

pleadings was totally negligent and confused as to whether the relief should

be sought in what form or what forum. The petition of appeal appears to be

a mixture of a Petition of Appeal and a Petition in Revision application.

In a petition of appeal of this nature the pleadings should not be

ambiguous but specific. The negligence on the part of the draftsman of

pleadings should amount to the disadvantage of the appellant and the petition

of appeal must be dismissed on this ground alone.

In the above circumstances this appeal is dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Appeal is dismissed.