==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of

Section 331of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka

Complainant

Court of Appeal Case No: Vs,

CA/HCC/0310/2025

High Court of Hambantota

Case No. HC/54/2020 Witharana Gamage Nilanga Ranil Kumara

alias Heen Mama

Accused

And Now Between

Witharana Gamage Nilanga Ranil Kumara

alias Heen Mama

Accused-Appellant

Vs,

Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent

2

Before: Amal Ranaraja, J.

Dr. Sumudu Premachandra, J.

Counsel: Shanaka Ranasinghe, PC with Anushika Ranasinghe and N.

Mihidukulasuriya instructed by Sandamali Peiris for the

Accused-Appellant

Kalana Kotelawala, SC for the State.

Argued on: 24.07.2026

Judgment on: 15.09.2026

Judgment

Amal Ranaraja. J,

1. The accused-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the “appellant”) has

been indicted in the High Court of Hambantota in Case

No.HC/54/2020. The charges in the indictment are as follows;

01. On or around the 04th of July 2015, within the jurisdiction of

this Court, in Suriyawewa, you, have committed rape against

one Loku Wahumpurage Jeewanthi Kumarathunga, a minor,

under the age of 16; hence, committed an offence punishable

under Section 364(2)(e) of the Penal Code of Sri Lanka as

amended by Penal Code (Amendment) Act No. 22 of 1995.

3

02. On or around the 04th of July 2015, within the jurisdiction of

this Court, in Suriyawewa, you, in order to gain some sexual

gratification have used a certain part of your body, on one

Loku Wahumpurage Jeewanthi Kumarathunga, a person

under 16 years of age, i.e. by placing your male genitalia near

her female genitalia; hence, committed “Grave Sexual Abuse”,

an offence punishable under Section 365B (2)(b) of the Penal

Code of Sri Lanka as amended by Penal Code (Amendment)

Act No.22 of 1995 and No. 29 of 1998.

2. At the conclusion of the trial, the appellant has been convicted of the

first and acquitted of the second charge and sentenced as follows;

i. 11 years rigorous imprisonment and fined a sum of Rs.

10,000.00 with a term of 6 months rigorous imprisonment in

default.

The appellant has also been directed to pay a sum of

Rs.400,000.00 as compensation to PW01 with a term of 1 year

simple imprisonment in default.

Case of the Prosecution

3. On the day of the incident, PW01 and her grandmother have decided to

go to PW01’s uncle’s place to spend the night. While on their way, PW01

has realised that she had forgotten the clothes that were necessary to

attend Sunday school the next day. PW01 has then returned home to

fetch these clothes. At that time, the appellant has entered the house

and had penile-vaginal intercourse with PW01 against her will.

4

Case of the Appellant

4. The appellant has contended that he went to the residence of PW01 at

her invitation. He has denied having penile-vaginal intercourse with

PW01 in that instance.

Grounds of Appeal

5. When the matter was taken up for argument, the learned counsel

appearing on behalf of the appellant, urged the following grounds of

appeal.

I. Has the learned High Court Judge failed to consider that the

evidence of the prosecutrix had not been corroborated by

independent evidence, and analyse as to whether it was safe to

convict the accused on her sole testimony?

II. Could the conviction be sustained due to the failure of the learned

High Court Judge to neither reject nor accept the dock statement

and thereby conclude that the dock statement has not caused a

reasonable doubt in the prosecution case?

III. Did the learned High Court Judge misdirect himself by arriving

at the conclusion that the prosecutrix, who was 12 years of age

at the time of the incident, will not engage in an act of self-

satisfaction in the absence of any evidence or without having the

opportunity to observe the demeanour of the prosecutrix whilst

giving evidence?

IV. Has the learned High Court Judge failed to consider that the

prosecution failed to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt?

5

V. Did the learned High Court Judge misdirect himself by failing to

consider that the prosecution did not place before Court, the

evidence of PW03 and PW04, to whom the prosecutrix is alleged

to have divulged the incident and whether the said failure caused

reasonable doubt in the prosecution case?

6. The case under consideration involves a young girl (PW01), who was

merely 12 years old at the time of the incident and had provided

testimony six years later. The complexities of recalling events from a

young age pose challenges, including potential for inconsistencies and

exaggeration.

7. To begin with, it is crucial to acknowledge the psychological aspects of

memory. Children possess cognitive faculties that are still developing.

Children experience difficulties in accurately recalling events, especially

those that are traumatic or extraordinary. As years pass the details may

become increasingly blurred, influenced by various factors, such as

discussions with peers, media exposure, or even parental input. The

likelihood of inconsistencies creeping into the testimony becomes

significant as memories are not fixed but rather, can evolve over time.

Hence, it is reasonable to expect a child’s account of an event to contain

inaccuracies, particularly several years later.

8. It is essential to consider the context in which these narratives are

made. The child may not remember specific details or may exaggerate

his/her narrative but may still convey the core truth of an incident.

Courts must evaluate whether the inconsistencies affect the substance

of the testimony, or if they pertain to peripheral details that do not alter

the fundamental truth of what has transpired.

9. Furthermore, placing undue emphasis on minor inconsistencies risks

undermining the very essence of justice. It is vital for the judicial system

to remain accessible and fair to vulnerable populations, such as

6

children. If Courts were to dismiss the entire testimony of a child

witness based on minor inconsistencies, it could deter future witnesses

from coming forward.

10. While alleged inconsistencies and exaggeration in the testimony of

PW01 warrant careful consideration, they should not automatically

invalidate her account. Especially, when such discrepancies are not

material to the core of her account.

11. The discrepancies in PW01’s testimony relate to several points. They

are, the location in the house where the appellant accosted PW01, the

reported duration of the incident, the specific room in which the

incident occurred, and the manner in which PW01 resisted prior to the

incident.

12. This Court deems such discrepancies not to be fundamental to PW01’s

testimony and consequently not material. Moreover, PW01 has

maintained consistency regarding the core incident involving the

appellant, specifically the penile-vaginal intercourse committed on

PW01.

13. In the case of R v B [2010] EWCA Crim 4 The Lord Chief Justice of

England and Wales, has held as follows;

“We emphasise that in our collective experience the age of a witness is

not determinative on his or her ability to give truthful and accurate

evidence. Like adults some children will provide truthful and accurate

testimony, and some will not. However, children are not miniature

adults, but children, and to be treated and judged for what they are, not

what they will, in years ahead, grow to be. Therefore, although due

allowance must be made in the trial process for the fact that they are

children with, for example, a shorter attention span than most adults,

none of the characteristics of childhood, and none of the special

7

measures which apply to the evidence of children carry with them the

implicit stigma that children should be deemed in advance to be

somehow less reliable than adults. The purpose of the trial process is to

identify the evidence which is reliable and that which is not, whether it

comes from an adult or a child.”

14. Further, in the case of AG v. Daradadagamage Chandraratne,

CA/85/2013, decided on 25.05.2018, S. Thurairaja PC, J, has held as

follows,

“Time and again Courts have discussed the acceptance of evidence of

children of tender ages. Our Judges are not there to test the memory of

the witness, they are expected to Eind the actual fact and the truth.

Witnesses are human being, they are not memory machines nor robots

to repeat the incident as it was. Further the natural behaviour of

human beings is to forget incidents, especially sad memories. No one

wants to re- visit painful moments and keep detailed memories with

them. We are also mindful most of our courts, with due respect, are not

child friendly. In this case a child giving evidence after 8 years and

subjected to cross examination more than 3 years is sufEicient to create

certain contradictions in her testimony. It is human nature.”

15. The Superior Courts in Sri Lanka have held that inter-labial

penetration, meaning contact with, or slight entry between the labia,

without full internal insertion, or the rapture of the hymen, is sufficient

to satisfy the penetration required for the offence of rape. Complete

insertion or tearing of the hymen is not required to prove that

penetration occurred

16. In the case of Perera Vs. The Attorney General (2012) 1 SLR 69, Ranjith

Silva J, has held as follows,

8

“In the book entitled The Essentials of Forensic Medicine and

Toxicology, Dr. K.S. Narayana Reddy at page 308 states as follows:

“The slightest penetration of the penis within the vulva, such as the

minimal passage of glands between the labia or with or without the

emission of semen or rupture of hymen constitutes rape. There need

not be a completed act of intercourse. Rape can be committed even

when there is inability to produce a penile erection. Rape can occur

without causing any injury and as such negative evidence does not

exclude rape.”

...

It is my view that one should analyse the evidence in this case in the

light of the above-mentioned expert medical opinion as the opinion

expressed above is the opinion of almost all the text writers on forensic

medicine and it has gained such notorious that any quote can take

judicial notice of the same.”

17. PW01, prior to being examined by Dr. A.S. Senevirathne, Consultant

Judicial Medical Officer has, in her history, stated as follows

Vide Page 272 of the Case Brief

9

i.e. That the appellant placed his penis on her vagina and made up and

down movements thereafter, indicating that the appellant had

penetrated her. Upon examining PW01, Dr. Senevirathne has prepared

a medico-legal report. This report has been produced as evidence

marked පැ 01. Following the examination, Dr. Senevirathne has opined

as follows;

“There were features suggestive of intercourse possibly inter labial”

Vide Page 274 of the Case Brief

18. The statement of PW01 to Dr. Senevirathne, as referred to above

indicates that she has remained consistent with respect to the core

incident involving the appellant. Furthermore, Dr. Senevirathne’s

opinion corroborates the same.

19. Further, the learned High Court Judge in pages 13 and 14 of his

judgement has stated as follows;

10

Vide Pages 158-159 of the Case Brief

i.e. That the evidence presented by the appellant fails to raise a

reasonable doubt regarding the prosecution’s case. As a result, the

learned High Court Judge has in effect, discredited the appellant’s

narrative and disregarded the same. Therefore, the argument asserting

that the learned High Court Judge has not rejected the appellant’s

evidence cannot be upheld.

20. In the domain of law, the concept of probability plays a crucial role in

determining the outcome of trials. The test of probability assesses how

likely an event is to occur or a claim to be true, based on available

evidence.

21. In the case of Wickramasuriya v Dedoleena and Others [1996] 2 SLR 95,

F.N.D. Jayasuriya J, has held,

“A Judge, in applying the Test of Probability and Improbability relies

heavily on his knowledge of men and matters and the patterns of

11

conduct observed by human beings both ingenious as well as those who

are less talented and fortunate.

...

If the contradiction is not of that character the Court ought to accept

the evidence of witnesses whose Evidence is otherwise cogent having

regard to the Test of Probability and Improbability and having regard

to his demeanour and deportment manifested by witnesses. Trivial

contradictions which do not touch the core of a party's case should not

be given much signiEicance, specially when the probabilities factor

echoes in favour of the version narrated by an applicant.”

22. PW01 has testified that when she was initially accosted by the

appellant, she screamed for help however, the appellant has then

gagged her with his fist, which has prevented her from continuing to

scream.

Given these circumstances, it is probable that PW01 would not have

been screaming at the moment PW02, Wewala Gamage Nuwan Lakmal,

an uncle of PW01, arrived at the scene of the incident.

“": දැ' ඊට පස්ෙස ෙමාක1ද 2ෙ'?

උ: ඊට පස්ෙස් ඒ 56ෂ ය මෙ9 ස්: එකට දැ<මට පස්ෙස් මම කෑ ගැ?වා.

ඒB මට ය'න D'ෙ' නැහැ. ඊට පස්ෙස් කාටවB Fය'න එපා FGවා.

": H' මාමා ෙකාෙහාමද ය'න D'ෙන නැBෙB?

උ: මෙ9 කට වහෙගන IJයා. කෑ ගහ'න එපා Fයලා FGවා.

...

": ඇM Nව'Oට PQB අහ'න 2ෙ' නැBෙB?

උ: මෙ9 කට වැ?වා.

12

": කාෙ9 කටද වැ?ෙG?

උ: මෙ9.

...

උ: ඊට පස්ෙස් මාව කාමෙSට එTකෙගන Uයා.

": ෙමාන කාමරයටද එTකෙගන UෙW?

උ: ඇXෙළ් Oෙයන මැද කාමරයට.

": එෙහම Nවා'O එTකරෙගන යනෙකාට Nව'O ෙමානවද කෙළ්?

උ: මම ඇZවා මට ය'න බෑ Fයලා. මම කෑගැ?වා ක26B IJෙW නෑ.”

Vide Pages 50-66 of the Case Brief during Evidence-in-Chief

“": තP' ඒ ෙවලාෙG කෑ ගහ'න උBසාහ කෙ^ නැBද?

උ: කෑ ගැ?වා. කට වැ?වා.

...

": තP' ඒ ෙවලාෙG කෑ ගැ?වා F2වා ෙ'ද?

උ: කෑ ගැ?වා ඒB ක26B IJෙW නැහැ.

...

": තP'ෙ9 කට _ගටම අO' වහෙගන IJයාද?

උ: කට වහලා මාව ඇදෙගන Uයා.”

Vide Pages 85-88 of the Case Brief Cross Examination

23. The appellant has also contended although PW01 had an opportunity

to divulge the incident involving the appellant to PW02 at the initial

instance, i.e. when PW02 arrived at the location the incident occurred,

13

that she has not done so. Consequently, PW01 has not been

spontaneous in disclosing the incident.

24. It appears that PW02, who is PW01’s uncle, had slapped PW01

immediately after confronting her about the incident involving the

appellant. After slapping PW01, PW02 has directed her to go to the

house, in which her grandmother was at that time, immediately. All this

has happened very quickly and PW01 has had no opportunity to explain

the situation to PW02.

25. Given these circumstances, it is understandable why PW01 did not

disclose the incident involving the appellant to PW02 at that moment.

However, PW01 upon arriving at the house in which her grandmother

was in, has divulged the incident involving the appellant to her relatives

present therein.

26. Consequent to such disclosure, a police complaint has been lodged the

very next day. In those circumstances, the contention that PW01 has

not been spontaneous in disclosing the incident involving the appellant

must fail.

27. Section 134 of the Evidence Ordinance No. 14 of 1895 reads as

follows:

“No particular number of witnesses shall in any case be required for the proof of any fact.” 28. The primary implication of Section 134 of the Evidence Ordinance is

the adoption of the principle that “evidence must not be counted but

weighed”. This has several key consequences in the Sri Lankan legal

system. A court can convict an accused or determine a case solely on

the uncorroborated evidence of a single witness provided that the judge

finds that witness to be cogent, credible, trustworthy and impressive.

29. The law does not require corroboration of witness’s testimony as an

essential condition for a conviction. The trial Judge has the discretion

14

to rely on the testimony if satisfied with its veracity after careful

probing. The emphasis is shifted from a mere head count of witnesses

to a careful judicial analysis and evaluation of the witness’s demeanour,

consistency, and overall trustworthiness of his testimony.

30. In Sumanasena v Attorney General [1999] 3 SLR 137, Jayasuriya J.

has held as follows:

“Evidence must not be counted but weighed and the evidence of a single

solitary witness if cogent and impressive could be acted upon by a Court

of law.”

31. Consequently, the learned High Court Judge was correct in considering

the testimony of PW01 and acting upon it.

32. It appears that the first formal complaint about the incident involving

the appellant has been lodged with the investigators on the very next

day, as PW09 (Officer in Charge of the Suriyawewa Police Station,

Inspector of Police Jayasinghe) has stated. This timing supports PW01’s

narrative that she reported the incident to her grandmother and an

aunt at the earliest opportunity.

33. Given this sequence of events the prosecution’s decision not to call

PW03 and PW04 could be readily understood, as their testimony would

have been cumulative, merely repeating facts already confirmed by

PW01’s prompt disclosure and the subsequent complaint.

34. Due to the matters discussed above, I am not inclined to interfere with

the conviction, judgement and the sentencing order imposed on the

appellant and proceed to affirm the same.

35. I dismiss the appeal but make no order regarding costs.

Appeal dismissed.

15

36. The term of rigorous imprisonment shall commence from the date this

judgement is conveyed to the appellant in the High Court of

Hambantota.

37. The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this Judgement to the

High Court of Hambantota for compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Dr. Sumudu Premachandra, J.

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal