IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1. M. H. M. Faizal,

No.18/2/5,

Charliman Road,

Colombo 06.

2. M. F. M. Fazil,

No.18/2/5,

Charliman Road,

Colombo 06.

Petitioners

CASE NO: CA/WRIT/261/2017

Vs.

1. I. M. U. K. Kumara,

Resident Project Manager,

Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka,

Victoria Project Office,

Nilagama, Digana,

Rajawella.

2. D. A. Asantha Gunasekera,

Director (Lands),

Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka,

No.500, T. B. Jaya Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

2

3. Anura Dissanayake,

Director General,

Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka,

No.500,

T. B. Jaya Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

4. Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka,

No.500,

T. B. Jaya Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

5. Rathmalge,

Land Officer,

Resident Project Manager Office,

Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka,

Victoria Project Office,

Nilagama,

Digana,

Rajawella.

6. M. K. G. Amarasiri,

Former Deputy Resident Project

Manager Victoria Project,

No.500,

T. B. Jaya Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

7. M. M. F. Rizwana,

No.39/2,

Gonawala Road,

Digana,

Rajawella.

Respondents

3

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

Counsel: Shantha Jayawardena for the Petitioners.

Suranga Wimalasena, S.S.C., with Indumini

Randeny, S.C., for the 1st-6th Respondents.

Kamran Aziz for the 7th Respondent.

Argued on: 14.07.2020

Decided on: 06.08.2020

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The land in issue was given to a person by the name of

Wanigasekera on an annual permit marked R1, under the State

Lands Ordinance. Wanigasekera sold the land to the 7th

Respondent in violation of condition No.6 of R1. The sale took

place prior to the marriage of the 7th Respondent (wife) to the 1st

Petitioner (husband). Such alienations are void in terms of

section 19 of the said Ordinance. Therefore, the permit R1 was

cancelled by the Mahaweli Authority by R3 in terms of section

17 of the Ordinance.

It appears, after the marriage of the 1st Petitioner and 7th

Respondent, a house was constructed on the land and the

parties lived there as their matrimonial home. There are three

children from this marriage. Due to matrimonial disputes, the

parties are now living separately. The eldest son is living with

the 1st Petitioner in the aforementioned house and the other two

children are living with the 7th Respondent in her parental

house.

4

It is the position of the 1st Petitioner that it is he who expended

money to buy the land and also construct the house thereon.

The 7th Respondent disputes this claim. Although not

conclusive, it appears the land had been bought by the 7th

Respondent and the house was constructed by the 1st Petitioner

vide P27.

Once the original permit issued to Wanigasekera was cancelled,

the property reverted to the State.

Thereafter, both the 1st Petitioner and the 7th Respondent appear

to have made representations separately to the Mahaweli

Authority to have a permit or long-term lease in respect of the

land issued in their favour.

An inquiry in this regard was admittedly held by the 6th

Respondent on 02.06.2016 with the participation of both

parties. The outcome of the inquiry and the recommendation

thereon sent to the 2nd Respondent is marked P27. The said

recommendation is not to issue the permit in the name of either

of the parties but to issue a long-term lease in the name of the

eldest son, the 2nd Petitioner. The reason given for this

recommendation is, in my view, acceptable: i.e. in the event the

permit is issued in the name of either the husband or wife, there

is a likelihood of alienation of the land due to matrimonial

disputes. The formal recommendation on P27 was made by the

2nd Respondent by P14.

The complaint of the 1st Petitioner is, subsequent to the said

inquiry and the formal recommendation whereby it was decided

to take steps to give the land on long-term lease to the 2nd

Petitioner, the 1st Petitioner was called for a second inquiry on

5

short notice on 30.11.2016. Although the 7th Respondent did

not participate at the second inquiry, the 1st Petitioner says the

5th Respondent, who conducted the inquiry, was biased in

favour of the 7th Respondent and expressly stated the 7th

Respondent is entitled to the land.

The 1st Petitioner protested against the second inquiry on the

same day by P16.

The 1st and 2nd Petitioners have filed this application on the

basis of a legitimate expectation created by P14, predominantly

seeking a writ of prohibition preventing the 1st-6th Respondents

from conducting further inquiries and a writ of mandamus

directing the said Respondents to act in terms of P14.

In the statement of objections filed by the 1st-6th Respondents

dated 05.07.2018, the said Respondents do not give any reasons

for holding the second inquiry.

But, in the written submissions, the said Respondents state,

after issuance of P14, the 7th Respondent again requested the

permit not be issued in the name of the 2nd Petitioner but in her

name vide 7R2. It is on this basis the decision to hold the

second inquiry was made. However, the 2nd Respondent did not

participate at the second inquiry. Hence the matter shall end

here.

The Petitioners entire case is based on the legitimate

expectation made out by P14. Learned Counsel for the

Petitioners draws the attention of the Court to Clive Lewis

Judicial Remedies in Public Law (4th Edition) at page 157, where

the learned author says In public law field, individuals may not

have strictly enforceable rights but they may have legitimate

6

expectations. Such expectations may stem either from a promise

or a representation made by a public body. This passage was

quoted with approval in Multinational Property Development Ltd

v. Urban Development Authority [1996] 2 Sri LR 51.

I am in agreement with the submission of learned Counsel for

the Petitioners that the Petitioners shall succeed in this

application on the legitimate expectation held out to them by the

Respondents in issuing P14.

What is legitimate expectation? As this Court remarked in

Junaideen Mohamed Iqbal v. The Divisional Secretary,

Kundasale,1 simply put, when a public authority represents that

it will or will not do something within its authority and later

attempts to rescind the said representation, a person who has

reasonably relied on it should be entitled to enforce it by law.

This concept is based on the principles of natural justice and

fairness, and seeks to prevent the abuse of power by public

authorities.

Wade discusses legitimate expectation in the context of inter alia

legal certainty, i.e. that the individual ought to be able to plan

his or her action on the basis that the expectation will be

fulfilled.2

Wade goes on to state:

A further and more satisfactory reason for the protection of

legitimate expectations lies in the trust that has been

reposed by the citizen in what he has been told or led to

1 CA/WRIT/328/2015, CA minutes of 19.02.2020.

2 H.W.R. Wade and C.F. Forsyth, Administrative Law, 11th Edition, p.451.

7

believe by the official. Good government depends upon trust

between the governed and the governor. Unless that trust is

sustained and protected officials will not be believed and

government becomes a choice between chaos and coercion.3

Our Courts have recognised and upheld this fundamental

principle of law over the years. (Vide Perera v. National Police

Commission,4 Perera v. Building Materials Corporation Ltd,5

Kurukulasooriya v. Edirisinghe,6 Ariyaratne v. Illangakoon.7)

The issuance of P14 and P27, followed by a second inquiry

without good reason and an attempt to vary the decision

previously made, entitles the Petitioners to the relief sought on

the basis of legitimate expectation.

At the argument, learned State Counsel appearing for the 1st-6th

Respondents informed the Court that the amicable settlement

suggested to divide the land among all three children was

unsuccessful, as division to three lots of this small extent of

land is against the rules of the local authority. This means the

permit or long-term lease shall be issued in the name of one

person.

Taking all the circumstances into account, I grant the reliefs to

the Petitioners as prayed for in paragraphs (c) and (g) of the

prayer to the petition. No costs.

3 Ibid.

4 [2007] BLR 14.

5 [2007] BLR 59.

6 [2012] BLR 66.

7 SC FR Application No. 444/2012, SCM of 30.07.2019.

8

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal