==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0139-142/2020

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979.

Court of Appeal Case No. The Democratic Socialist Republic of

CA/HCC/139-142/2020 Lanka

HC/ Kalutara Case No.

Case No. HC/316/2003.

COMPLAINANT

Vs.

1. Diyapaththugama Vidanalage

Kumara Samarasinghe

2. Diyapaththugama Vidanalage

Ravindra

3. Diyapaththugama Vidanalage Sisira

Kusum Samarasinghe

4. Diyapaththugama Vidanalage

Sarath Samarasinghe

5. Pushpawarna Hettiarachchi

ACCUSED

NOW BETWEEN

CA/HCC/0139-142/2020

2 | P a g e

1. Diyapaththugama Vidanalage

Kumara Samarasinghe

2. Diyapaththugama Vidanalage

Ravindra

3. Diyapaththugama Vidanalage

Sisira Kusum Samarasinghe

4. Diyapaththugama Vidanalage

Sarath Samarasinghe

ACCUSED-APPELLANTS

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Tenney Fernando with Pasindu Gamage

for the 1st and 4th Appellants.

U.R.De Silva, PC with Pradeep

Kaluarachchi, Thilini Atapattu, Chatura

Weeramantry, Sanuri Dissanayake and

Hansani Pathirana for the 2nd Appellant.

Neranjan Jayasinghe with Randunu

Heelage for the 3rd Appellant.

Riyaz Barry, DSG for the Respondent.

CA/HCC/0139-142/2020

3 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 14/10/2025

DECIDED ON : 03/12/2025

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellants (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellants) with the 5th Accused were indicted in the High Court of Kalutara

for committing the murder of Prematilaka Hettiarachchi alias Mahatun on

06.03.1998 in three counts of offences punishable under Sections 140, 146

and 296 read with Section 32 of the Penal Code.

The trial had commenced before the High Court Judge of Kalutara as the

Appellants and the 5th Accused had opted for a non-jury trial. After the

conclusion of the prosecution’s case, the learned High Court Judge had

called for the defence and the 2nd Appellant and the 5th Accused had made

statements from the dock. The others opted to remain silent. After

considering the evidence presented by both parties, the learned High Court

Judge acquitted the Appellants from counts number 01 and 02 and

convicted the Appellants for count number 3 and sentenced them to death

on 11/06/2020.

The 5th Accused was acquitted from all the charges.

CA/HCC/0139-142/2020

4 | P a g e

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellants

preferred this appeal to this court. The Learned Counsel for the Appellant

informed this court that the Appellants have given consent to argue this

matter in their absence.

The 3rd Appellant had passed away on 24.07.2025 while receiving treatment

at the Prison Hospital. Hence, the appeal proceeded only against the 1st, 2nd,

and 4th Appellants.

On behalf of the 1st and 4th Appellants, the following Grounds of Appeal

are raised:

1. The learned High Court Judge has misdirected himself by believing the

sole eye witness while disregarding the contradictions and omissions

highlighted and marked in his testimony.

2. The learned High Court Judge has misdirected himself by failing to

address material contradictions and omissions.

3. The learned High Court Judge had misdirected himself by convicting

the Appellants based on the uncorroborated testimony of a discredited

single eye witness.

On behalf of the 2nd Appellant, the following Grounds of Appeal are

raised:

1. The learned High Court Judge has not properly evaluated the evidence

of key witnesses.

2. The learned High Court Judge has rejected the omissions and the

contradictions without giving reasons.

As the appeal grounds raised by the Learned Counsel for the 1st and 4th

Appellant and the grounds raised by the Learned President’s Counsel for the

CA/HCC/0139-142/2020

5 | P a g e

2nd Appellant are interconnected, the said grounds will be considered

together hereinafter.

Background of the case.

According to PW1, Athulajeewa, the deceased is his uncle and was running

a food stall about three kilometres from the Pelawatta town. On the day of

the incident, at around 7.00pm he had gone to pick up his uncle from his

food stall. When he was riding his motor bike with the deceased, on the new

bridge which was on their way, the witness, with the aid of an electric light

nearby, had spotted a group of people lurking on the middle of the bridge.

After seeing the crowd, the deceased had told him to ride the motorbike

through the old bridge to avoid the crowd.

Before entering the old bridge, when the motor bike had slowed down to

negotiate a hump on the old bridge, the motorbike had broken down and

toppled to the side of the old bridge. While he was near his motor bike, the

deceased had started to run from the scene. At that time, PW1 had seen with

the help of the nearby lights, the 1st Appellant dealing a blow to the back of

the deceased’s head with a manna knife. Due to the fatal blow, the deceased

had collapsed and the witness had seen the 2nd, 3rd and 4th Appellants

standing in the vicinity. The 2nd and 4th Appellants, who were armed with

iron rods, had pelted stones at him to chase him out from the scene of crime.

Due to fear, he took to his heels and when he had turned back, he had seen

the 2nd and 4th Appellants dealing blows on the deceased’s body with iron

rods. PW1 had then hidden himself in the dark for about one hour and had

only appeared after the arrival of the police.

There were about 07 cut injuries, one abrasion and one contusion noted on

the deceased by the doctor and according to him the death was a result of a

haemorrhage shock due to Cranio-Cerebral injuries from the cut injuries to

the head.

CA/HCC/0139-142/2020

6 | P a g e

After the closure of the prosecution’s case, the defence was called and the

2nd Appellant and the 5th Accused had opted to make a statement from the

dock which had been rejected by the Learned High Court Judge. The others

had opted to remain silent.

As the Appeal grounds raised by the Learned Counsels are interconnected,

this appeal will be considered under the following common grounds:

1. The Learned High Court Judge had misdirected himself by convicting

the Appellants based on the uncorroborated testimony of a discredited

single eye witness.

2. The Learned High Court Judge had misdirected himself by believing

the sole eye witness and other witnesses and had failed to properly

analyse their evidence.

3. The Learned High Court Judge had rejected the omissions and the

contradictions without giving reasons.

The Counsel for the Appellant argues that PW1’s evidence is not corroborated

by any other witnesses. In this case, PW1 is an eye witness. He had clearly

seen the incident without any disruptions on that day.

Section 134 of the Evidence Ordinance states as follows;

“No particular number of witnesses shall in any case be required for the

proof of any fact.”

In this case, PW1 had clearly witnessed the incident and had given evidence

19 years after the incident. He had studied up to grade eight. The High Court

Judge had considered these circumstances in his judgement.

CA/HCC/0139-142/2020

7 | P a g e

In the case of Sumanasena v. The Attorney General [1999] 3 Sri.L.R 137

held that;

“Evidence must not be counted but weighed and the evidence of a single

solitary witness if cogent and impressive could be acted upon by a Court

of Law.”

In the case of Madduma Siripala and another v. The Attorney General

CA/125-126/10 decided on 27/10/2017, Justice Thurairaja held that:

“With reference to the above-mentioned section, there is no requisite

number of witnesses needed to be called to prove a fact. In fact, the

evidence of a single witness is sufficient to prove a fact provided the

evidence of the witness is uncontradicted, truthful, independent and

reliable to the court”.

In the case of Chacko Alias Aniyan Kunju & others v. State of Kerala-

[2004] INSC 87 (21st January 2004) held that:

“The provision clearly states that no particular number of witnesses is

required to establish the case. Conviction can be based on the testimony

of single witness if he is wholly reliable. Corroboration may be necessary

when he is partially reliable. If the evidence is unblemished and beyond

all possible criticism and the Court is satisfied that the witness was

speaking the truth then on his evidence alone conviction can be

maintained”.

With reference to the above cited judicial decisions, it is abundantly clear

that the trial court can act on the evidence of a single witness whose evidence

is truthful and impressive to come to a correct finding.

CA/HCC/0139-142/2020

8 | P a g e

In this case PW1 had vividly explained how the Appellants had committed

the murder of the deceased.

The doctor had noted about 09 injuries on the deceased. The first injury had

been inflicted on the head of the deceased. Further, six cut injuries were seen

on the head of the deceased. According to the doctor the death was caused

as a result of a haemorrhage due to Cranio-Cerebral injuries from the cut

injuries to the head. The medical evidence is therefore quite consistent with

the evidence given by the eye witness in respect of the assault on the

deceased.

Independent corroboration being provided in a murder case, will generally

not be a sine qua non for a conviction, as long as such evidence is considered

to be compelling and reliable. In situations where such uncorroborated

testimony of a single witness is proved to be credible and reasonable by the

court, a conviction can be sustained.

Although no necessity arises to corroborate the testimony of PW01, his

testimony has been corroborated by the medical evidence. In this case PW01

is an eye witness. His evidence is not tainted with improbabilities or with any

visible ambiguity. Therefore, acting on PW01’s evidence will not prejudice the

Appellants’ rights.

It has been claimed in the second ground that the learned High Court Judge

has misdirected himself by believing the sole eye witness and other witnesses

and had failed to properly analyse their evidence. The counsel for the

Appellants referring to the evidence given by the witnesses called by the

prosecution further argues that there are some deviations existing in the

evidence given by them.

The Learned High Court Judge in his judgment had very correctly analysed

all the evidence to arrive at his conclusion. He had meticulously analysed

the evidence given by the eye witness along with medical evidence and other

CA/HCC/0139-142/2020

9 | P a g e

witnesses, and had pronounced his judgement, finding the Appellants guilty

of murder of the deceased in this case.

In the final ground of appeal, the learned Counsel for the Appellants

contended that the learned High Court Judge has rejected the omissions and

the contradictions without giving reasons.

The Appellants contend that the Learned Trial Judge has misdirected himself

by placing total reliability on the most important witness PW1, who had

displayed a complete lack of creditworthiness when the defense Counsel had

highlighted several material contradictions and omissions. Thereby, it was

contended that a conviction for murder is not safe based on his testimony.

The importance of an omission in criminal trials has been discussed in

several judicial decisions by the Appellate Courts of our country. It is

pertinent to discuss whether the above-mentioned omissions have any

adverse effect on the evidence given by PW01 in this case.

In the case of The Attorney General v. Sandanam Pitchi Mary Theresa

(2011) 2 Sri L.R. 292 held that,

“Whilst internal contradictions or discrepancies would ordinarily affect

the trustworthiness of the witness statement, it is well established that

the Court must exercise its judgement on the nature of the inconsistency

or contradiction and whether they are material to the facts in issue.

Discrepancies which do not go to the root of the matter and assail the

basic version of the witness cannot be given too much importance.

Witnesses should not be disbelieved on account of trifling discrepancies

and omissions. When contradictions are marked, the Judge should

direct his attention to whether they are material or not and the witness

should be given an opportunity of explaining the matter.”

CA/HCC/0139-142/2020

10 | P a g e

The incident happened on 06/03/1998 and PW01 had given evidence before

the High Court on 06/02/2017 after about 19 years of the incident.

Considering the contradictions, omissions and the passage of time after the

incident, a reasonable court cannot expect hundred percent accurate

evidence from a witness. The Appellate Courts have repeatedly endorsed this

position in several decided cases.

Justice Thakkar in Bhoginbhai Hirigibhai v State of Gujarat 1983 AIR SC

753 stated:

“Discrepancies which do not go to the matter and shake the basic version

of the witnesses therefore cannot be annexed with undue importance. More

so when the all-important probabilities-factor echoes in favour of the

version narrated by the witnesses.”

The learned High Court Judge in his judgment at pages 286-288 had

considered the omissions highlighted and contradictions marked, and had

arrived at the finding that the said commissions and contradictions do not

go to the core of the case.

I too agree with the learned High Court Judge that the omissions and

contradictions highlighted by the Appellants do not go to the root of the

prosecution’s case.

The learned High Court Judge adhering to the Section 283 of the Criminal

Procedure Code Act No. 15 of 1979, had correctly evaluated the evidence

presented by both sides and delivered the judgment. In the Judgment, the

learned High Court Judge had very correctly analysed the evidence presented

by the prosecution and the defence.

Considering all appeal grounds advanced by the Appellants in this case, I

conclude that none of the grounds have any merits.

CA/HCC/0139-142/2020

11 | P a g e

Considering the evidence led at the trial, I am of the view that there are no

reasons to interfere with the judgment of the learned High Court Judge of

Kalutara. For the reasons stated above, I affirm the conviction and the

sentence imposed on the Appellants.

The appeal is dismissed.

The Registrar is directed to send this judgment to the High Court of Kalutara

along with the original Case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL