==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 11

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Section

331 (3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act

No.15 of 1979, read with Article 139 of the

Constitution of the Democratic socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

CA Case No: CA-HCC 20/2020

HC of Kalutara case No: 261/2011

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Complainant

Vs

Ananda Srikanth

Accused

And Now in Between

Ananda Srikanth

Accused -Appellant

vs

The Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department

Colombo 12.

Complainant- Respondent

Page 2 of 11

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Amal Ranaraja, J

Counsel : G.L. Perera for the Accused- Appellant

Maheshika Silva, DSG, for the Respondent

Written

Submissions: 08.02.2021 (by the Accused-Appellant)

On 30.01.2026 (by the Respondent)

Argued On : 23.01.2026

Judgment On: 23.03.2026

JUDGEMENT

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

The Accused- Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant) was indicted before the

High Court of Kaluthara on the charge of committing the offence of rape of one Kalimuthu

Wasantha on or about 12.09.2013, punishable under Section 364(1) of the Penal Code.

At the trial, the prosecution presented evidence through 6 witnesses and marking

productions P1-P5 and thereafter closed its case. The Appellant, in his defence, made a

dock statement on his behalf.

At the conclusion of the trial, the Learned High Court Judge, by judgment dated

13.02.2020, found the Appellant guilty of the charge and imposed a sentence of 18 years

of rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 15,000/- and 2 years imprisonment in default.

Further, compensation of Rs. 250,000/- was ordered to be paid to the victim; in default, a

term of 2 years imprisonment is imposed.

Being dissatisfied with both the conviction and the sentence imposed by the Learned High

Court Judge, the Appellant preferred an appeal before this Court, articulating the

following grounds in support of their challenge.

Page 3 of 11

1. The Learned Trial Judge has failed to properly consider and evaluate the evidence

led at the trial.

2. The Learned Trial Judge has failed to consider the defence of the Appellant.

3. The Learned Trial Judge has acted on uncorroborated evidence of Prosecution

witnesses.

4. The Learned Trial Judge has not considered the necessity to have a faulty mental

element to commit this offence and

5. The sentence is excessive.

The principal contention of the appellant was that the prosecution had failed to establish

whether the victim had properly identified the victim. It is well settled that in criminal

cases, the identification of the offender is essential. The issue before us, therefore, is the

manner in which the prosecution has sought to prove the identification of the appellant.

The facts and circumstances of this case are as follows,

PW01, Kalimuthu Wasantha, the victim in the incident, aged 51 years, stated that at the

time of the occurrence, she was residing at Dowson Watta, Hinatiyangala. She further

testified that a complaint was lodged with the Dodangoda Police on 13 September 2003

regarding an incident that had taken place on 12 September 2003. On that day, she had

traveled to Colombo with a sister called ‘Hamo’ concerning a land matter and arrived at

sister’s residence at Central House at about 3:30 p.m. She left the house at 5:30 p.m. by

bus and reached Dowson Junction between 6:30 and 7:00 p.m.

After meeting a woman named Nagamma, she walked approximately 35 feet along a road

lined with rubber plants. The witness testified that the appellant approached the victim

from behind, grabbed her, and was recognized by her in the moonlight.

Page 70 of the brief,

ප්‍ර : ම ොකක්ද සිද්දිය වුමේ ?

උ : පස්මසන් ඇවිල්ලො බදලො ඇල්ුවො, අල්ලන එක ත යි දැක්මක්.

ප්‍ර : කවුද කියලො දැක්කද ?

උ : ඔව්

Page 4 of 11

ප්‍ර : කවුද ?

උ : ශ්‍රී කොන්්

ප්‍ර : ශ්‍රී කොන්් කියලො තමුන් මකොම ො ද දුනො ග්ම්?

උ : ම ොඳට ඳ එලිය තිබුනො

She identified him as a person from the village, known by the name “Betta”, alias Ananda

Shri Kanth. The witness stated that after a struggle, the appellant restrained the victim

and led her away from the roadside into a nearby rubber plantation. The appellant then

compelled the victim to the ground and removed her underwear. Further witness has

uttered the following.

Page 75 of the brief,

ප්‍ර : මකොම ො ද ඒ මවලොමව හිටිමය ?

උ: කට බැඳලො නිසො කතො කරන්න බැ ැ. සිිං මලන් කතො කමර. කෑග න්න එපො තව් 3 මදමනක්

ඉන්නවො කියලො සිිං මලන් කිවමව්. කට බැදලො නිසො ම ොකු් කතො කරන්න බැ ැ.

Then the appellant, after removing his zip, inserted her male organ into her vagina, where

the victim had struggled.

Page 76 of the brief,

උ : මේ ඇග උඩට ඇවි් සිප් එක ගලවො එයොට අවශ්‍ය තැනට එයොමේ එත තියලො අවශ්‍ය මද්ද කරො.

ප්‍ර : ම ොකද්දද එයොමේ එක කියලො කියන්මන, ඒකට කියන වචනය ම ොකක්ද?

උ : පිරිමි ඇග.

ප්‍ර : පිරිමි ඇග මකොම ්ටද තිබමබ ත ොමේ ?

උ : මේ ගැ ැනු ඇගට තිබිබ්බො.

උ : එම තියලො ම ොකක්ද කමර ඇතුළ් කරොද?

Page 5 of 11

ප්‍ර : ඔව් ඇතුලට තිබ්බො.

උ : එම මකොච්චර විතර මවලොවක් හිටයද ?

ප්‍ර : මවලොවක්නම් නම් ට කියන්න බැ ැ. පැය භොගයක් පැයක් විතර ඉන්න වුනො. මේ පපුව

ඔක්මකො මිරිකුවො. ට මවලොව නම් රියට කියන්න බැ ැ.

After approximately half an hour, the appellant left the scene. The victim then gathered

herself, leaving behind most of her belongings, and went to her mother and reported the

incident.

The witness further stated that she disclosed the name of the appellant to her mother.

Thereafter, the victim’s husband and mother went to the appellant’s house and conveyed

the incident to the appellant’s mother. Subsequently, the appellant came to the victim’s

house accompanied by his mother, denied the allegations, and made a vow at a kovil,

asserting that there was another person in Darahena who resemble like him. On the

following day, the witness revisited the scene with several villagers. Since the appellant

had claimed that another person similar to him, she searched the area but found no one.

She then lodged a complaint to the Dodangoda police.

When the Court inquired as to who had committed the act, the witness unequivocally

identified the appellant and gave her testimony accordingly.

Page 83 of the brief,

අධිකරණමයන්:

ප්‍ර: කවුද ඒක කමල්?

උ : ට මම්ක කමල් ම යො ත යි කමල්. ඇස් මදමකන් දැක්කො. කට ඩ ම යොමේ කට ඬ.

ට ළ යි මදන්මනක් ඉන්නවො. ට ඉන්න තැනක් නැ ැ රියට. (සොක්ිකොරිය ඩමින් සොක්ි මදයි.

එය අධිකරණමේ නිරීක්ෂණයක් වශ්‍මයන් සට න් කර කරම්.)

The witness also stated that she had known the appellant from 1992 to 2003, and the

appellant had talked with the witness.

Page 6 of 11

Page 84 of the brief

ප්‍ර : සොක්ිකොරිය මම් සිද්දධියට කලින් මකොච්චර කොලයක් මම් වි්තිකරු අදුරනවද?

උ : විවො මවලො එ ොට ගිය කමල් ඉදල දන්නවො.

ප්‍ර : අපි දන්මන් නැ ැ විවො වුමන් කවදද කියලො ?

උ : විවො මවලො එ ොට ගිමේ 1992

ප්‍ර : 1992 ඉඳල 2003 මවනමවනකල් දන්නවො?

උ : එම ත යි හිටිමේ

ප්‍ර : මම් තැනැ්තො එක්ක කථො කරලො තිමයනවද ?

උ : වසන්ත අක්මක් කියලො කථො කරනවො. එච්චරයි.

ප්‍ර : මම් සිද්දිය සිදුවුණ මවලොමව් සැක ැර මම් පුද්දගලයො අඳුර ග්තද ?

උ : ඔව්

The witness stated that she had clearly seen the face of the appellant, who also mentioned

that there were three other individuals in Sinhala.

Page 85 of the brief,

ප්‍ර : මකොම ො ද ඳුනො ග්ම් ?

උ : එයොමේ මුහුණ දක්කො, ඒ මවලොමව් කිව්වො මබට්‍රො ොව අතරන්න කියලො එයො තව තුන්මදමනක්

ඉන්නවො කිව්වො, සිිං මලන් කිවිව්ව මද්දවල් වලින් එයො කියලො දන්නවො.

ප්‍ර : තව් තුන් මදමනක් ඉන්නවො කියලො විතරද කිව්මව්?

උ : ඔව්, ඊට පස්මස් මුකු් කථො කමල් නැ ැ. කට ගැට ගැහුවට පස්මස් කිව්වො තව තුන්මදමනක්

ඉන්නවො කියලො.

She subsequently lodged a complaint with the Dodangoda Police and handed over as

evidence of the washed undergarment and the unwashed clothing she had been wearing

on the day of the incident.

During cross-examination, the witness stated that the appellant had approached her from

behind, and at first, she did not see him. She further testified that she struggled with the

appellant, and when a bicycle was passing by, the appellant restrained her by covering

her mouth. Then the witness further stated that the Appellant spoke in Sinhala.

Page 7 of 11

Page 101 of the brief,

ප්‍ර : පුද්දගලයො ආපු ආකොරය තමුන් දැක්මක නෑ?

උ: ඔව්. පිටි පස්මසන් ත යි ආමව්. දැක්මක නැ.

ප්‍ර : පුද්දගලයො තමුන් කිව්වො තමුන්මේ කට වැහුවො කියලො?

උ: අල්ලපු ග න් කට වැහුමව් නෑ. එතන මපොර බැදුවො. එතමකොට වො න එළියක් ආවො. එළියක් එන

මකොට ත යි ොව කට බැඳලො පල්මල ොට ඇදමගන ගිමේ.

ප්‍ර: දොන් ඒ අදොල පුද්දගලයො තමුන් එක්ක සිිං මලන් කතො කමළ්?

උ : ඔව්.

The witness admitted that she only came to know of the appellant’s complaint against her

when she went to the police station.

PW4, JMO Dr. Sunil Kumara, who examined the victim on 15.09.2003, testified that he

observed four injuries on the victim’s body. The first was a wound caused by a nail on the

left side of her face, slightly to the left of her mouth. The second consisted of several

scratches on the right leg below the knee. The third was a scratch on the front of her left

ankle, and the fourth was a scratch on the back of her right knee. He explained that these

scratches were consistent with injuries caused by trees and thorns. The witness further

testified that the victim’s vaginal area appeared slightly red and that she experienced

pain in that region. He explained that such redness and pain could result from the

insertion of a male penis. The witness stated that the medical examination findings were

consistent with the brief history provided by the victim.

Upon the conclusion of the prosecution's evidence, the appellant made a dock statement in which he denied responsibility for raping the victim.

The central issue before us is whether the victim has properly identified the appellant. I

am mindful of the dictum in Regina v. Turnbull, which sets out the principles governing

visual identification in criminal cases.

“Secondly, the judge should direct the jury to examine closely the circumstances in

which the identification by each witness came to be made. How long did the witness

Page 8 of 11

have the accused under observation? At what distance? In what light? Was the

observation impeded in any way, as for example by passing trame or a press Of

people?

Had the witness ever seen the accused before? How often? If only occasionally, had

he any special reason for remembering the accused? How long elapsed between the

original observation and the subsequent identification to the police? Was there any

material discrepancy between the description of the accused given to the police by

the witness when first seen by them and his actual appearance?”

Further held that,

All these matters go to the quality of the identification evidence. If the quality is

good and remains good at the close of the accused's case, the danger of a mistaken

identification is lessened; but the poorer the quality, the greater the danger. In our

judgment, when the quality is good, as for example when the identification is made

after a •long period of observation, or in satisfactory conditions by a relative, a

neighbour, a close friend, a workmate and the like, the jury can safely be left to

assess the value of the identifying evidence even though there is no other evidence

to supportit; provided always, however, that an adequate warning has been given

about the special need for caution.

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC considered this dictum. J in the case of Pallawa Lekamlage Gayan

Sanjrrwa alias Asanka Wewellawela and 2 others v Attorney General, CA 246/2009,

decided on 01.09.2015.

“In the present case, according to the prosecutrix the three accused were known to

her previously but the same principles discussed in the Turnbull case will apply to

her identification as well, except for having an identification parade.”

Opatha Widanapathiranege Wasantha and 3 Others v. Attorney General (2010. V. II

Unreported), CA 179/2006, Decided on 29.04.2010, W.L. Ranjith Silva, J

“ The Learned Trial Judge ought to have followed the standard guidelines with

regard to his directions to the jury. On the issue of identification evidence, the

judges must give accurate directions regarding the identification evidence and

direct the jury that they must be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the

accused was correctly identified and give the benefit of any doubt to the accused.

The Jury must be directed as to the possibility of a mistaken identify even by

Page 9 of 11

honest witnesses and if they cannot make up their minds as to whether the

witnesses were lying or mistaken the accused must be given the benefit of the

doubt and should be acquitted. The trial judge must direct the jury to examine

closely the circumstances under which the identification came to be made and the

means of identification. The trial judge should direct the jury on the rules laid

down in Rex v. Turnbull.”

With the above judgements in mind, I now turn to the question of how the victim was able

to identify the appellant.

1. The victim testified that she recognized the appellant when he grabbed her from

behind, aided by the moonlight.

2. She had known the appellant personally for more than twelve years.

3. The Appellant had spoken with him on prior occasions before the incident, hence

the victim has the ability to identify his voice.

4. The appellant remained with her for approximately half an hour, giving her

sufficient opportunity to observe and identify him.

Applying the principles set out in Regina v. Turnbull, it is clear that the victim was able

to identify the appellant not only by sight but also by voice. I find no reason to disbelieve

her version, as the circumstances demonstrate that she had ample opportunity to observe

and recognize him since the Appellant was with the witness for around half an hour. The

appellant was not a stranger to her, having been known to her for more than a decade,

and she reported the incident to her mother immediately after it occurred without

expressing any doubt as to his identity. Moreover, the appellant himself did not deny that

he was unknown to her.

Page 196 of the brief,

ආනන්ද ශ්‍රී කොන්්, දූෂණයක් කලො කියලො නඩුවක් දොලො තිමයනවො. ඒක කමල් නැ ැ කියලො

කියනවො ස්වොමීනි. ට කී ට ඇ්ම් එප ණයි.

I also note that if indeed there was another person resembling like the appellant, the

appellant himself could have attested to this fact before the police and produced such a

person. His failure to do so creates a clear doubt as to the credibility of that claim. On the

other hand, the victim’s conduct in attempting to search for such a person demonstrates

her genuineness and reinforces the reliability of her version. These factors collectively

Page 10 of 11

strengthen the reliability of her identification and support the conclusion that the

appellant was correctly recognized by the victim.

Another matter to be considered is that, according to the victim, she identified the

appellant by his voice. I am mindful that Sri Lankan jurisprudence is not unfamiliar with

the use of voice identification evidence in criminal trials.

For instance, his Lordship Sisira de Abrew J. in Hatangalage Ariyasena v. Attorney

General CA 68/2011 decided on 21.2.2013, considered this point (at p. 5):

“Next question that arises for consideration is whether the accused

appellant could be convicted on voice identification…The accused appellant, prior

to the separation from his wife, was living in his wife's house which was in the

same land where the ancestral house was located. Kalyani was living in the

ancestral house. She says that the accused appellant and Nalani were living

together for several months. The accused appellant made utterances which I have

referred to earlier. When I consider all these matters I hold the view that there

was no difficulty for her to identify the voice of the accused appellant.”

His Lordship cited the following passage from the judgment of Kirpal Singh v. State of

Uttar Pradesh, AIR (1965) 712, in which Justice Shah held:

“It is true that the evidence about identification of a person by the timbre of his

voice depending upon subtle variations in the overtones when the person

recognizing is not familiar with the person recognized may be somewhat risky in

a criminal trial. But where the accused is intimately known to the witness and for

more than a fortnight before the date of the offence he had met the accused on

several occasions in connection with the dispute, it cannot be said that

identification of the assailant by the witness from what he heard and observed was

so improbable that the Supreme Court would be justified in disagreeing with the

opinion of the Court which saw the witness and formed its opinion as to his

credibility and of the High Court which considered the evidence against the

appellant and accepted the testimony”

Page 11 of 11

Having cited the same, his Lordship concluded thus:

“Applying the principles in the above judicial decision and the above observations,

I hold that Kalyani had identified the accused appellant by his voice. What did the

accused appellant say when he came near the ancestral house of Kalyani. "Your

family destroyed me. One was killed. I will kill all of you. Open the door." These

were the words used by him. Little before she heard these words the deceased was

shouting in pain and later she heard the groaning sound of the deceased person.

The above items of evidence clearly show that the accused appellant had killed the

deceased person.”

According to the victim’s version, she had ample opportunity to identify the appellant both

by voice and by the light of the moon. There is no reason for us to disbelieve her version,

as the circumstances clearly demonstrate that she was familiar with the appellant and

had sufficient time to recognize him.

In those circumstances, I am not inclined to interfere with the judgment delivered by the

Learned High Court Judge dated 13.02.2020, together with the sentencing order, and

dismiss the appeal.

The Appeal is dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Amal Ranaraja, J.

I AGREE

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL