CA(PHC)/0030/2020

Page 1 of 16

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

Petition of Appeal under section 755(3) and section 758 of the Civil Procedure Code against the Order of the Learned High Court Judge dated 20th February 2020 in 01/17/Writ in Provincial High Court of Western Province Holden in Gampaha. Court of Appeal Case No. CA(PHC)/0030/2020

Subramaniam Sathasiwam, No. 258/151, Canal Road, Hendala, Wattala

Petitioner Vs.

1. Pradeshiya Sabha

Wattala. 2. Raj Fernando

No. 258/42, Canal Road, Hendala, Wattala.

Respondents

AND NOW BETWEEN

Raj Fernando No. 258/42, Canal Road, Hendala, Wattala.

2nd Respondent-Appellant Vs

Subramaniam Sathasiwam, No. 258/151, Canal Road, Hendala, Wattala

Petitioner-Respondent

CA(PHC)/0030/2020

Page 2 of 16

Pradeshiya Sabha Wattala.

1st Respondent-Respondent Before: D. THOTAWATTA, J. K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J. Counsel: Chandrika Wijesooriya instructed by Wathsala Dulanjani for the Appellant.

Aravinda Rohan Ivor Athurupane with Pubudu Piyasena Kalehewatta for the 1st Respondent-Respondent. Ransith Funawardena instructed by Jayani Silva for the Petitioner-Respondent. Argued on : 07.05.2025 Written Submissions of the 2nd Respondent-Appellant tendered on : 03.10.2024 and 24.07.2025 Written Submissions of the Petitioner-Respondent tendered on : 05.02.2025 Written Submissions of the 1st Respondent-Respondent tendered on : 23.10.2024 Decided on : 29.08.2025

CA(PHC)/0030/2020

Page 3 of 16

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

The instant appeal arises from an order of the learned High Court Judge of the

Provincial High Court of Western Province holden in Gampaha dated

20.02.2020 (hereinafter called and referred to as the Order) wherein, the

learned High Court Judge of Gampaha had issued a mandate in the nature of a

writ of Mandamus directing the 1st RespondentRespondent-the Pradeshiya-

Sabha Wattala (hereinafter called and referred to as the 1st Respondent) to

demolish an unauthorized parapet wall constructed by the 2nd Respondent-

Appellant (hereinafter called and referred to as 2nd Respondent) in between the

land belonging to the Petitioner-Respondent (hereinafter called and referred to

as Petitioner) as more fully described in the schedule to the petition of the

Petitioner and shown and depicted as lot 12 in the plan produced to the High

Court of Gampaha by the Petitioner along with his petition marked as fm3 and

the road reservation shown and depicted as lot 13 in the said plan (fm3) as

means of access to his land (lot 12 in the said plan marked as fm3). Being

aggrieved by the order, the 2nd Respondent has now, preferred to this Court the

instant appeal on the grounds of appeal as more fully set out in paragraph 14

of the petition of appeal among any other grounds of appeal that may be urged

by Counsel at the hearing of this appeal which may be reproduced verbatim the

same as follows;

i. It is respectfully submitted that the said order is contrary to Law

and against the weight of the material placed before the said court;

ii. It is respectfully submitted that the Learned High Court Judge has

failed to identify and apply the legal principles established by the

judgments of Superior Courts pertaining to the granting of writs

which are directly applicable to the matter at hand;

iii. It is respectfully submitted that the Learned High Court Judge has

failed to adjudicate on the objections raised and consider the

CA(PHC)/0030/2020

Page 4 of 16

submissions made by and on behalf of the 2nd Respondent-

Appellant;

iv. It is respectfully submitted that the Learned High Court Judge has

erred in law holding that Petitioner-Respondent is entitled to the

reliefs prayed for by his petition;

v. It is respectfully submitted that the Learned High Court Judge has

erred in law holding that the Petitioner-Respondent has fulfilled

the requirements to be entitled to the granting of the Writ prayed

for;

vi. It is respectfully submitted that the Learned High Court Judge has

failed to recognize that the Petitioner-Respondent has failed to

fulfill the mandatory prerequisites to file this application;

vii. It is respectfully submitted that the Learned High Court Judge has

erred in law holding that the 01st Respondent-Respondent had

already concluded that the alleged boundary wall built by the 2nd

Respondent-Appellant was illegal and unauthorized at the time of

filing this application;

viii. It is respectfully submitted that the Learned High Court Judge has

erred in law granting the writ of Mandamus prayed for by the

Petitioner-Respondent where the alleged duty denied by the

Pradeshiya Sabha is a mere discretionary power of the same;

ix. It is respectfully submitted that the Learned High Court Judge has

failed to recognize that Unexplained delay is fatal to the

maintainability of an action seeking writ;

x. It is respectfully submitted that the Learned High Court Judge has

failed to recognize the claim of prescriptive rights of the 2nd

Respondent-Appellant over Lot D13;

xi. It is respectfully submitted that the Learned High Court Judge has

failed to recognize that the matter at hand is a dispute pertaining

to a plot of land, which is privately owned thus not falling under

CA(PHC)/0030/2020

Page 5 of 16

the definition and/or purview of thoroughfare as stated in

Pradeshiya Sabha Act;

xii. It is respectfully submitted that the Learned High Court Judge has

failed to recognize that there are other alternate remedies available

to the petitioner-Respondent;

xiii. It is respectfully submitted that the Learned High Court Judge has

failed to recognize that the matter at hand is a dispute which

warrants the adjudication of a court with original civil jurisdiction;

xiv. It is respectfully submitted that the Learned High Court Judge has

failed to recognize the unexplained undue delay on the part of the

Petitioner-Respondent to make this application;

xv. It is respectfully submitted that the Learned High Court Judge has

failed to recognize that the rights of both Petitioner-Respondent as

well as 2nd Respondent-Appellant with regard to Lot D13 in Plan

3189 required to be adjudicated upon to resolve the dispute at

hand;

xvi. It is respectfully submitted that the Learned High Court Judge has

failed to recognize that the matter at hand is pertaining to a right

of way which cannot be resolved by the issuance of the writ

pleaded by the Petitioner-Respondent.

The facts material and relevant to the instant appeal as recited by the 2nd

Respondent in his petition of appeal, may be briefly, set out as follows;

The Petitioner had by furnishing to Court a petition dated 20.02.2017,

instituted action bearing No. 01/17/Writ in the Provincial High Court of

Western Province holden in Gampaha praying for a mandate in the nature of a

writ of mandamus directing the 1st Respondent-Pradeshiya Sabha-Wattala to

demolish an unauthorized parapet wall allegedly, constructed by the 2nd

Respondent in between the land belonging to the Petitioner as more fully

described in the schedule to the petition of the Petitioner and shown and

CA(PHC)/0030/2020

Page 6 of 16

depicted as lot 12 in the plan (fm3) and the road reservation shown and

depicted as lot 13 in the said plan (fm3) as means of access to his land (lot 12

in fm3).

On the other hand, the 1st Respondent had inter-alia, urged that the

application of the Petitioner be dismissed in-limine in view of the of the

preliminary legal objections so raised in paragraph 2(w), (wd), (we) and (wE) of its

statement of objections, dated 23.08.2017 with regard to the maintainability of

the application of the Petitioner. The preliminary legal objections so raised may

be summarized in the following manner;

a) the disputed roadway (lot 13 in the said plan fm3) upon which the

unauthorized parapet wall was alleged to have been constructed by

the 2nd Respondent, is a private roadway and therefore, not one

managed and controlled by the 1st Respondent-Pradeshiya Sabha and

as such, there is no legal duty cast upon it in relation to the matters

averred in the petition of the Petitioners;

b) there exists two access roadways to the land claimed by the Petitioner

(lot 12 in the said plan fm3), and therefore, it would be unreasonable

for the Petitioner to claim the roadway in dispute (lot 13 in the said

plan fm3) as means of access thereto by making the 1st Respondent-

Pradeshiya Sabha responsible therefor, in as much as the Petitioner

can without any hindrance and/or obstruction, have access to his

land through the roadway lying along the western boundary of his

land, namely; Cardinal Cooray Mawatha which is managed by the 1st

Respondent-Pradeshiya Sabha;

c) However, in terms of the letter annexed to its statement of objections

marked as X1, the power delegated by the Urban Development

CA(PHC)/0030/2020

Page 7 of 16

Authority to the 1st Respondent-Pradeshiya Sabha for the demolition

of an unauthorized construction have now, been taken back by it and

therefore, re-vested on it and hence, the Urban Development

Authority is a necessary party to the instant action and therefore, the

relief sought in its petition by the Petitioner cannot be obtained from

the High Court without making Urban Development Authority as a

party to the instant action;

d) at the time of the institution of the instant application before the High

Court of Gampaha, the tenure of office of the 1st Respondent-

Pradeshiya Sabha had become elapsed and in consequence, the

powers and duties exercised by it had been vested with the Municipal

Commissioner thereof, but, however, the Petitioner had not exercised

due diligence to substitute him as a party to the instant action in the

place of the 1st Respondent-Pradeshiya Sabha and therefore, the

Petitioner cannot in law, obtain from Court the relief as prayed for in

prayer to his petition without making the Municipal Commissioner a

party to the instant action.

It is to be observed that, the 2nd Respondent too, had while raising in

paragraph 2(i),(ii),(iii),(iv),(v),(vi),(vii) and (viii) of his statement of objections,

dated 16.10.2017 a similar set of preliminary legal objections, as raised by the

1st Respondent with regard to the maintainability of the application of the

Petitioner, urged that the application of the Petitioner be dismissed in-limine in

view thereof.

However, the learned Provincial High Court Judge of Western Province sitting

in Gamapha, had while overruling the preliminary legal objections so raised, by

both the 1st as well as the 2nd Respondents as aforesaid, proceeded to issue a

mandate in the nature of a writ of Mandamus directing the 1st Respondent

Pradeshiya-Sabha to demolish an unauthorized parapet wall constructed by

CA(PHC)/0030/2020

Page 8 of 16

the 2nd Respondent in between the land belonging to the Petitioner (lot 12 in

the plan marked as fm3)and the road reservation (lot 13 in the said plan fm3)

used as means of access to his land by holding that, it was undisputed nor was

it denied by the 2nd Respondent that the parapet wall in question had been

constructed by the 2nd Respondent himself on the very location stated in the

petition of the Petitioner and that it was an unauthorized construction

inasmuch the 2nd Respondent had failed to furnish any building plan approved

by the 1st Respondent in respect thereof, or a certificate of conformity issued by

the 1st Respondent, in respect thereof notwithstanding the request so made by

the 1st Respondent-Pradeshiya Sabha from the 2nd Respondent to produce

them if any, before it, and that however, the 1st Respondent-Pradeshiya Sabha

who having so initiated legal action into it upon bringing it to the notice of it by

the Petitioner, had afterwards, abandoned the legal action so initiated by it

halfway through thereby, preventing itself from exercising the powers of

demolition of the same so vested in it.

It is this order that the 2nd Respondent now, seeks to canvas before us on the

grounds of appeal so enumerated in his petition of appeal.

However, it is significant to observe at this juncture that, neither appeal nor

cross appeal had been preferred to this Court from the order of the High Court

by the 1st Respondent-Pradeshiya Sabha. Hence the order made by the High

Court against the 1st Respondent-Pradeshiya Sabha still, remain unchallenged

and uncontroverted.

The principle relief sought in the application filed before the High Court by the

Petitioner being a mandate in the nature of a writ of Mandamus directing the

1st Respondent Pradeshiya-Sabha to demolish an unauthorized parapet wall

constructed by the 2nd Respondent in between the land belonging to the

Petitioner as more fully described in the schedule to the petition of the

Petitioner and shown and depicted as lot 12 in the plan (fm3)and the road

CA(PHC)/0030/2020

Page 9 of 16

reservation shown and depicted as lot 13 in the said plan (fm3) used by him as

means of access to his land (lot 12 in the said plan marked as fm3).

Upon a careful analysis of the documentary evidence adduced by the Petitioner

before the High Court of Gampaha by way of deed of transfer bearing No.2917

by which the Petitioner claims title to the lot 12 along with the road reservation

lot 13, the plans bearing Nos. 3189 and 8341, certified copies of which were

annexed to his petition by the Petitioner respectively, marked as fm1, fm2 and

fm3 and also by the 2nd Respondent by way of the deed of transfer bearing

No.2917 by which the 2nd Respondent claims title to the lots 10 and 11 along

with the road reservation lot 13, the plans bearing Nos. 3188 and 5159,

certified copies of which were annexed to his statement of objections by 2nd

Respondent respectively, marked as R1, R2 and R3, and also, upon a careful

reading of the averments in paragraph 6 of the statement of objections of the

2nd Respondent, it becomes undoubtedly, and manifestly, clear that both the

Petitioner as well as the 2nd Respondent are claiming title to the plots of land

shown and depicted in the subdivision plan bearing No. 3189 and the disputed

road reservation (the said lot 13) is situated in between the two lands belonging

to the Petitioner as well as the 2nd Respondent.

The basis for the relief sought in the High Court by the Petitioner being that,

the parapet wall had been constructed by the 2nd Respondent on the road

reservation (lot 13 in the said plan- fm3); and that it was an unauthorized

construction and therefore, the Petitioner has a legal right to have it

demolished by the 1st Respondent Pradeshiya Sabha for; it has a public duty

to demolish it.

Upon a careful perusal of paragraph 6(i),(iii),(iv) and (vi) of the of the statement

of objections of the 2nd Respondent and also the paragraphs 2.7, 2.8, 3.1.6,

and 3.1.12 of the amended written submissions of the 2nd Respondent dated

18.10.2019 filed before the High Court, it undoubtedly shows, that 2nd

CA(PHC)/0030/2020

Page 10 of 16

Respondent had unmistakably, and in no uncertain terms, admitted the truth

of the allegation levelled against him by the Petitioner in his petition filed in the

High Court praying for a mandate in the nature of a writ of Mandamus to

demolish the said parapet wall in that the 2nd Respondent had admitted that;

the parapet wall in dispute had been constructed by the 2nd Respondent on the

road reservation (lot 13 in the said plan- fm3); and that it was an unauthorized

construction.

Besides, nowhere in his statement of objections or in his written submissions

filed in the Court below, or else, in the submissions oral and written made by

him before us in the course of the argument of this appeal, had he taken up a

position that the so called construction of the parapet wall was done in terms

of a building plan approved by the 1st Respondent-Pradeshiya Sabha and a

Certificate of Conformity was granted to him by it certifying that, it had been

built in compliance and conformity with the rules and/or regulations and/or

conditions contained in a building plan approved by the 1st Respondent-

Pradeshiya Sabha and/or any other laws and regulations applicable thereto

and therefore, the construction of the said parapet wall was an authorized

construction and therefore, not liable to be demolished by the 1st Respondent-

Pradeshiya Sabha or Urban Development Authority and therefore, the

Petitioner is not entitled to have it demolished by the 1st Respondent-

Pradeshiya Sabha by way of a writ of Mandamus issued by this Court

compelling it so to do.

Moreover, the 2nd Respondent had in his petition of appeal or in the course of

the argument of this appeal, never sought to challenge and/or question the

legal validity of the findings of the learned Provincial High Court Judge of the

Western Province sitting in Gampaha that, in view of the failure on the part of

the 2nd Respondent to produce before the 1st Respondent-Pradeshiya Sabha

when so requested, a building plan if any, approved by the 1st Respondent-

Pradeshiya Sabha in respect of the construction of the so called construction of

CA(PHC)/0030/2020

Page 11 of 16

the parapet wall or a Certificate of Conformity issued by it certifying that the

construction of the said parapet wall was done in compliance and conformity

with the rules and/or regulations and/or conditions contained in a building

plan approved by the 1st Respondent-Pradeshiya Sabha and/or any other laws

and regulations applicable thereto, the construction of the said parapet wall

was an unauthorized construction and therefore, the Petitioner is entitled to

have it demolished by the 1st Respondent-Pradeshiya Sabha by way of a writ of

Mandamus issued by this Court compelling it so to do.

Hence, those findings of the learned Provincial High Court Judge of the

Western Province sitting in Gampaha remain uncontroverted, unchallenged

and entirely, justified.

In the circumstances, the learned Provincial High Court Judge of the Western

Province sitting in Gampaha was entirely, right and justified in issuing a

mandate in the nature of a writ of Mandamus on the 1st Respondent compelling

it to demolish the aforesaid unauthorized construction of the parapet wall

admittedly, built by the 2nd Respondent without any lawful authority granted to

him by the 1st Respondent or otherwise and therefore, in total contravention of

the laws and regulations prevalent in this regard.

I would therefore, hold that the instant appeal is not entitled to succeed both in

fact and law and therefore, it should be dismissed in-limine.

The wrong for the prevention or redress of which the instant action was

brought by the Petitioner before the High Court praying for a writ of

Mandamus, is not the obstruction of his right of way in and over lot 13 of the

said plan (fm3) by the 2nd Respondent, but, the unauthorized construction of a

parapet wall admittedly, by the 2nd Respondent thereon, without any lawful

authority granted to him by the 1st Respondent or other competent authority

and therefore, in total contravention of the laws and regulations prevalent in

this regard.

CA(PHC)/0030/2020

Page 12 of 16

In the circumstances, the pivotal question that arose before the High Court for

its adjudication was as to whether or not a writ a Mandamus should be issued

as prayed for by the Petitioner compelling the 1st respondent to demolish the

parapet wall admittedly, constructed by the 2nd Respondent on the said right of

way (lot 13 of the said plan-fm3) and not the question whether or not the 2nd

Respondent had acquired prescriptive title to the said right of way (lot 13 of the

said plan-fm3) for; it is a matter to be adjudicated upon by a Court of

competent civil jurisdiction and not a matter to be adjudicated upon by a High

Court in the matter of an application for a writ of Mandamus.

I would therefore, find myself unable to agree with the contention advanced by

both the 1st Respondent as well as the 2nd Respondent in appeal that, it is a

matter to be adjudicated upon by a Court of competent civil jurisdiction and

not a matter to be adjudicated upon by a High Court in the matter of an

application for a writ of Mandamus and therefore, the action of the Petitioner is

misconceived in law and therefore, it should have been dismissed in-limine by

the High Court. Hence, it should be rejected in-limine for; it cannot sustain

both in fact and in law.

It was the uncontroverted and unchallenged findings the learned Provincial

High Court Judge of the Western Province sitting in Gampaha that the said

parapet wall was an unauthorized construction admittedly, built by the 2nd

Respondent without any lawful authority granted to him by the 1st Respondent

or otherwise and therefore, in total contravention of the laws and regulations

prevalent in this regard.

Nature of an unauthorized construction is of its perpetuity until, it is

demolished by a competent authority vested with the power of demolition of the

same. Hence, an unauthorized construction has a state or quality of lasting

forever until, it is demolished by a competent authority, and therefore, a cause

CA(PHC)/0030/2020

Page 13 of 16

of action would accrue there from in every moment so long as an unauthorized

construction is in continuous existence.

In the circumstances, I would find myself unable to agree with the next

contention advanced by both the 1st Respondent as well as the 2nd Respondent

in appeal that the Petitioner is guilty of laches and therefore, the High Court

ought to have dismissed the instant application of the Petitioner in-limine.

Hence, I would proceed to reject it too, for; it too, cannot sustain in law.

In view of the documentary evidence adduced by the Petitioner along with his

written submissions filed before this Court by way of a Circular-. . .

. /1, dated 20.03.1985, issued by the Director General of

Urban Development Authority wherein the Urban Development Authority being

the competent authority had by clause 6 thereof, inter-alia, delegated its powers

to local authorities in relation to institution of actions for unauthorized

constructions.

In view of the documentary evidence adduced by the 1st respondent along with

his statement of objections filed before the High Court marked as X1, issued

by the Chairman of the Urban Development Authority being the competent

authority had on the other hand, by clause 5 thereof, inter-alia, taken back

some of its powers so delegated to the local authorities by the said Circular-

. . . . /1, dated 20.03.1985, issued by the Director

General of Urban Development Authority in relation to institution of actions for

unauthorized constructions, namely, .."

" .

Hence, what had been so taken back by the Urban Development Authority is

only a kind of unauthorized constructions, namely; Taking legal action against

unauthorized constructions that may be deemed to be "obstructing the public

interest.. thus, leaving behind the local authorities the powers so delegated

by the Urban Development Authority by the said Circular -. . .

CA(PHC)/0030/2020

Page 14 of 16

. /1, dated 20.03.1985, issued by the Director General of Urban

Development Authority, in relation to taking legal action against a kind of

unauthorized constructions, namely; Taking legal action against unauthorized

constructions that may be deemed to be "obstructing the private individuals

interest..

Upon a careful reading of the Circular-. . . . /1, dated

20.03.1985, issued by the Director General of Urban Development Authority

together with the letter dated 23.01.2017, marked as X1, also, issued by the

Chairman of the Urban Development Authority, it becomes abundantly, clear,

that, the public duty is cast upon the 1st Respondent being the Pradeshiya

Sabha-Wattala to demolish an unauthorized construction erected within its

purview that may be deemed to be obstructing the private individuals interest

and therefore, the Petitioner has a legal right to have it demolished by 1st

Respondent by way of a writ of Mandamus.

I would therefore, hold that the further contention so advanced by both the 1st

Respondent as well as the 2nd Respondent in appeal before us that the powers

so, delegated by the Urban Development Authority by the Circular-. . .

. /1, dated 20.03.1985, issued by the Director General of

Urban Development Authority to the 1st Respondent being the Pradeshiya

Sabha-Wattala had been taken back by the Urban Development Authority by

the letter dated 23.01.2017, marked as X1, issued by the Chairman of the

Urban Development Authority and therefore, the 1st Respondent being the

Pradeshiya Sabha-Wattala had no power to take legal action for the demolition

of the unauthorized construction admittedly, constructed by the 2nd

Respondent on the road reservation (lot 13 in the plan-fm3) and therefore, the

learned High Court Judge ought to have dismissed the instant application in-

limine, too, cannot sustain both in fact and law and as such it too, should be

rejected.

CA(PHC)/0030/2020

Page 15 of 16

In the light of the Circular-. . . . /1, dated 20.03.1985,

issued by the Director General of Urban Development Authority and the letter

dated 23.01.2017, marked as X1, also, issued by the Chairman of the Urban

Development Authority, it becomes abundantly, clear, that, the powers still,

remain in the local authorities to take legal action against the unauthorized

constructions erected within its purview that may, be deemed to be obstructing

the private individuals interest and therefore, public duty is cast upon the 1st

Respondent being the Pradeshiya Sabha-Wattala to demolish an unauthorized

construction erected within its purview that may be deemed to be obstructing

the private individuals interest and as such, the Petitioner has a legal right to

have it demolished by 1st Respondent by way of a writ of Mandamus without

making Urban Development Authority a party to the action for; the power so

exercised by a local authority is not sui generis but one so, delegated to it by

the Urban Development Authority and therefore, the exercise of power by a

local authority in relation to the demolition of an unauthorized construction is

in effect, the exercise of the power vested in the Urban Development Authority

and the exercise of such power is thus, deemed to be an exercise of power not

by the relevant local authority but by the Urban Development Authority

through its agent under the authority of the delegated power by it to a local

authority. Hence, institution of an action under the delegated power by a local

authority in Court for a demolition order is deemed to be an action instituted

by its Principle, namely; Urban Development Authority.

Hence, I would hold that, the further contention so advanced by both the 1st

Respondent as well as the 2nd Respondent in appeal before us that, action of

the Petitioner should fail for want of necessary parties, namely; Urban

Development Authority and therefore, the learned High Court Judge ought to

have dismissed the instant application in-limine, too, cannot sustain both in

fact and law and as such it too, should be rejected.

CA(PHC)/0030/2020

Page 16 of 16

It would be pertinent at this juncture to mention that, in my judgement, I have

properly, directed my judicial mind to the legal authorities cited in their

submissions oral and written, by Counsel in support of their respective

positions so adverted to in appeal before us.

For the reasons enumerated above, I would hold that, the instant appeal is not

entitled to succeed both in fact and law.

Hence, I would see no legal basis to interfere with the order of the learned

Provincial High Court Judge of the Western Province sitting in Gampaha.

In the result, I would proceed to dismiss the instant appeal with costs payable

to the Petitioner-Respondent by both the 1st Respondent-Respondent as well as

the 2nd Respondent-Appellant.

Order is affirmed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL