CP(PHC)APN 144/2022

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Revision under and in terms of Article

138 of the Constitution.

Court of Appeal Park Warden

Application No: Wilpattu National Park

CA(PHC)APN 0144/22 Hunuwilagama,Pahalamaragahawewa.

High Court of Anuradhapura Complainant

HCRA 13/2022 Vs.

MC Nochchiyagama

Case No.41435 Herath Bandage Gunawardena

Wanamalgama, Horuwila.

Accused

Sugathapalage Indika Mahesh Bandara

Lindawwa, Nochchiyagama.

Claimant

AND THEN BETWEEN

Sugathapalage Indika Mahesh Bandara

Lindawwa, Nochchiyagama.

Claimant-Petitioner

Vs.

The Warden

Wilpattu National Park

Hunuwilagama,Pahalamaragahawewa.

Complainant-Respondent

CP(PHC)APN 144/2022

2 | P a g e

Herath Bandage Gunawardena

Wanamalgama, Horuwila.

Accused-Respondent

The Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department

Colombo-12.

Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

Sugathapalage Indika Mahesh Bandara

Lindawwa, Nochchiyagama.

Claimant-Petitioner-Petitioner

Vs.

Park Worden

Wilpattu National Park

Hunuwilagama,Pahalamaragahawewa.

Complainant-Respondent-Respondent

Herath Bandage Gunawardena

Wanamalgama, Horuwila.

Accused-Respondent-Respondent

The Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department

Colombo-12.

Respondent-Respondent

CP(PHC)APN 144/2022

3 | P a g e

BEFORE : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

P. Kumararatnam, J.

COUNSEL : Asanka Dissanayake with Ershan

Ariaratnam for the Petitioner.

S.M.M.Fahim, SC for the State.

ARGUED ON : 16/10/2023.

DECIDED ON : 20/02/2024.

******************************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The Complainant-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as

the Complainant) filed a charge sheet against the Accused-Respondent-

Respondent (Hereinafter referred to as the Accused) under and in terms

of Section 9A (1) read with Section 10(d) of the Fauna and Flora

Protection Ordinance as amended by Act No.22 of 2009 for illegally

using a machine (Backhoe) bearing engine No.08432 and bearing

chassis No. 19308, in respect of which the Petitioner is the owner.

As the Accused pleaded guilty to the charge sheet, the Learned

Magistrate of Nochchiyagama had convicted the Accused as charged

and imposed a fine of Rs.20000/- with a default sentence and fixed for

an inquiry whether to confiscate or not the machine (Backhoe) which

had been used to commit the offence.

CP(PHC)APN 144/2022

4 | P a g e

Considering the Section 64 (1) of the Fauna and Flora Protection

Ordinance, the Backhoe which is the subject matter could be

considered as an instrument used in the commission of the offence.

At the conclusion of the inquiry, the Learned Magistrate had decided to

confiscate the aforesaid machine by his order dated 01.09.2022. At the

inquiry, the Petitioner and the Accused had given evidence in support of

the Petitioners claim.

Being aggrieved by the order of the Magistrate, the Petitioner filed a

Revision Application in the Provincial High Court of Anuradhapura to

revise the order of the Learned Magistrate of Nochchiyagama. After

support when moved to issue notice, the Learned High Court Judge of

Anuradhapura by his order dated 06.10.2022 refused to issue notices

to the Respondents.

Now the Petitioner filed this Revision Application to set aside the order

of the Learned High Court Judge of Anudhapura dated 06.10.2022 and

the order of Learned Magistrate of Nochchiyagama dated 01.09.2022.

Although the absolute owner of the machine was the Lanka Oriental

Leasing Company, the company had submitted a letter to the Court

that they have no objection to the machine concern being released to

the owner. As the Petitioner is the owner of the machine, the Court had

released the it to the Petitioner after perusal of the necessary

documents submitted.

The Petitioner states that although he had filed an appeal to this Court

against the order of the Learned High Court Judge of Anuradhapura, he

had compelled to file this Revision Application in the event if the

Learned Magistrate takes steps to enforce the order by auctioning the

machine concern, it will cause not only great prejudice but he has to

suffer substantial loss as well.

CP(PHC)APN 144/2022

5 | P a g e

The Petitioner had submitted following exceptional circumstances

for consideration:

a) Has the Learned High Court Judge failed to consider that on the

date of supporting, the Petitioner had only to put forward a prima

facie case, and thereby erred not to issue notices on the

Respondents?

b) Has the learned High Court Judge failed to appreciate that there

were exceptional circumstances warranting the exercise of

revisionary jurisdiction of the High Court as pleaded in the

petition of the Petitioner?

c) Have both the Learned Magistrate and the Learned High Court

Judge failed to consider and/or misdirected themselves with

regard to the rights of the absolute owner and the absolute owner

to be heard in a claim inquiry with regard to a vehicle?

d) Have both the Leaned Magistrate and the Learned High Court

Judge failed to consider that the Petitioner has proved ownership

of the said vehicle on a balance of probability?

e) Have both the Learned Magistrate and the Learned High Court

Judge failed to consider that the Petitioner has proved that the

Petitioner had no knowledge of the commission of the offence?

f) Have both the Learned Magistrate and the Learned High Court

Judge failed to consider that the Petitioner had taken all

precautions to prevent the use of the vehicle for the commission

of the offence?

CP(PHC)APN 144/2022

6 | P a g e

g) Have both the Learned Magistrate and the Learned High Court

Judge misdirected themselves by imposing a higher burden of

proof on the Petitioner in a vehicle confiscation inquiry?

h) Have both the Learned Magistrate and the Learned High Court

Judge failed to consider and properly apply the accepted legal

principles and judicial precedents in deciding whether to

confiscate or not a vehicle liable for confiscation in a vehicle claim

inquiry?

In this case the Learned High Court Judge only considering the order of

the Magistrate Court of Nochchiyagama decided to dismiss the Revision

Application stating that that the Petitioner had failed submit plausible

reasons to revise the Learned Magistrates order.

In this case the machine (Backhoe) had been confiscated for excavating

gravel within the boundaries of Wilpatthu National Park without the

written authority of the Director of Wildlife Department.

The Petitioner has given evidence in the Court and has claimed that he

was unaware of the crime being committed as he has given the mechine

for only to dig 40 holes on the land owned by R.P.Sugathadasa to plant

coconut plants. The operator Gunawardena of the machine was

appointed one year prior to the incident. The operator is paid 20%

commission of the charge levied by the Petitioner. The operator had

been given proper instructions specially not to use the machine for any

illegal activities. The Petitioner had given evidence and vividly explained

how he had taken preventive measures that the machine not being

used for illegal activities.

The operator of the machine Gunawardena also gave evidence on behalf

of the Appellant in the inquiry. According to him, after he finished work

contracted with one R.P.Sugathadasa, two villagers had come there and

CP(PHC)APN 144/2022

7 | P a g e

pleaded him to excavate gravel in order to put on to a road which was

used by the common people. Although he refused at the very outset but

agreed to the request as the duo told him to help them considering it

was a meritorious act. As such, with much reluctant he had excavated

gravel from a ditch in a land. But the Petitioner was not aware that the

land is belonging to the Wildlife Department. According to him he had

not sought permission from the Petitioner to excavate gravel.

Despite the adducing cogent evidence that the Petitioner had no

knowledge about committing the offence by the Accused, the Learned

Magistrate has dismissed the application on the basis that the

Petitioner had failed to show that he took all necessary precautions to

prevent a crime being committed.

The Learned High Court Judge, relying on the order of the Magistrate of

Nochchiyagama, refused to issue notice to the Respondents.

In Commissioner of Police v. Tanes (1957-58) 68 CLR 383, the

Court held that:

"It is a deep-rooted principle of the law that before anyone

can be punished or prejudiced in his person or his property

by any judicial or quasi-judicial procedure, he must be

afforded adequate opportunity of being heard ... "

By this order of the Learned High Court Judge of Anuradhapura, the

Petitioners right to a fair trial has been greatly violated. Considering the

time period consumed after the High Court order, I consider it is not

appropriate to send this case for re-hearing. Hence, firstly, I set aside

the order of the Learned High Court Judge of Anuradhapura dated

06.10.2022.

CP(PHC)APN 144/2022

8 | P a g e

Now I am going to consider whether the exceptional circumstances

raised on behalf of the Petitioner have any merit. As the exceptional

circumstances mentioned above are interconnected, all exceptional

circumstances will be considered together hereinafter.

As the law stands today, the Claimant in a confiscation inquiry should

prove that he or she had have taken all preventive measures on a

balance of probability. Hence, the Learned Magistrate should consider

all the evidence very carefully before coming to a conclusion.

In The Orient Financial Services Corporation Ltd v. The Range

Forest Officer, Ampara and Hon. Attorney General [2013] 1 SLR

208 the Court held that:

1. Before an order for forfeiture is made the owner should be given

an opportunity to show cause. If the owner on balance probability

209 satisfies the Court that he had taken precautions to prevent

the commission of the offence or the offence was committed without

his knowledge nor, was he privy to the commission of the offence,

the vehicle has to be released to the owner.

2. When it comes to showing cause as to why the vehicle should

not be confiscated, only the person who was in possession and

control of the vehicle could give evidence to the effect that the

offence was committed without his knowledge and he had taken

necessary steps to prevent the commission of the offence.

In Mudankotuwa v Attorney General [1996] 2 SLR 77 the court held

that:

As seen from the evidence the vehicle was taken over by the

driver from the Petitioners house in the morning and it was

CP(PHC)APN 144/2022

9 | P a g e

returned to him in the evening with the collections. Further, clear

instructions had been given by the Petitioner to the driver, not to

transport timber or use the vehicle for any illegal

purposeTherefore, the Magistrate was in error when he came

to the conclusion that the Petitioner had exercise no control or

supervision over the driver regarding the use of the tractor.

In this case the Petitioner had hired the Accused only in the capacity of

an operator to engage in hires only allowed by the Petitioner. As such at

all times the Petitioner had the full control over his machine.

Further, the Petitioner, as the owner of the machine had given evidence

and explained to the Court that he had taken all the possible and

necessary precautions to prevent the machine being used for illegal

purposes. Hence, when considering the evidence, experience of common

life must be seriously considered. The level of precautions expected

under Section 64(1) of the Fauna and Flora Protection Ordinance as

amended by Act No.22 of 2009 should not be artificially looked at but

should be assessed subjectively based on the facts and the

circumstances of each case.

In CA/PHC/203/17 decided on 21.06.2022, Iddawala J, held that:

A vehicle owner employing a driver to carry out transportation of

goods cannot reasonably be expected to physically visit each and

every site to ensure that illegal activities are not caries out using

his vehicle.

The Learned Magistrate also should have considered that there had

been no previous or pending case against in respect of the machine that

had been used for illegal activities and the Accused is not a habitual

offender.

CP(PHC)APN 144/2022

10 | P a g e

In Mallawa Arachchige Supun Malhara v The Attorney General

CA(PHC) 09/2015 dated 28.08.2020 the Court held that:

The Accused is not a driver employed by the Appellant; he is a

person doing business of his own who has access to the vehicle

when requested. It is fair to assume that the Appellant would not

have expected the Accused to do anything illegal. This is what is

elicited in the evidence of the Appellant. It is quite apparent that

there is no evidence that the Appellant was privy to the illegal act

of the Accused.

In Ceylinco Leasing Corporation v M.H. Harrison and others SC

Appeal 43/2012 dated 07.12.2017 His Lordship Aluvihare P.C J. held

that:

Section 40 of the Forest Ordinance provides for the confiscation of

the conveyance used to transport the illicit timber and the provision

to my mind is intended to strike at the means of transportation by

providing for the confiscation of the conveyance used to transport

the illicit timber, and is both a logical and legal response to the

problem of illicit felling. Even in the instant case the two persons

who were charged happened to be the driver of the lorry and

another person who had been seated next to the driver. Although

they were in physical possession of the illicit timber, may have

been employees of the owner of the lorry. Thus, not much

deterrence is achieved by imposing punishment on the persons

who were in actual physical possession of illicit timber, when in

most cases, the owner is behind the illegal operation.

It is apparent that in the absence of the Petitioner having had

knowledge of excavation gravel and /or having had any monetary or

personal benefit from the crime committed cannot be deemed as the

person behind the illegal operation.

CP(PHC)APN 144/2022

11 | P a g e

The Learned Magistrate found fault with the Petitioner for not calling

any other witnesses in support of his claim. This is a clear misdirection

against the scope of Section 134 of Evidence Ordinance.

Section 134 states:

No particular number of witnesses shall in any case be required

for the proof of any fact.

In the case of Vadivelu Thevar Vs. State of Madras SIR S C 614 the

Indian Supreme Court observed: -

On a consideration of the relevant authorities and the provisions

of the IEA 1872, the following propositions may be safely stated as

firmly established:

(1) As a general rule, a court can and may act on the testimony of a

single witness though uncorroborated. One credible witness

outweighs the testimony of a number of other witnesses of

indifferent character.

(2) Unless corroboration is insisted upon by statute courts should

not insist on corroboration except in cases where the nature of the

testimony of the single witness itself requires as a rule of prudence,

that corroboration should be insisted upon, for example, in the case

of a child witness whose evidence is that of an accomplice or of an

analogous character. (Emphasis is mine)

(3) Whether corroboration of the testimony of a single witness is or

is not necessary, must depend upon the facts and circumstances of

each case and no general rule can be laid down in a matter like

this and much depends upon the judicial discretion of the judge

before whom the case comes. In view of these considerations, we

have no hesitation in holding that the contention that in a murder

case, the court should insist upon a plurality of witnesses, is much

too broadly stated. Section 134 of the Indian Evidence, has

categorically laid it down that no particular number of witnesses

CP(PHC)APN 144/2022

12 | P a g e

shall, in any case, be required for the proof of any fact. The

Legislature determined, as long ago as 1872, presumably after due

consideration of the pros and cons, that it shall not be necessary

for proof or disproof of a fact, to call any particular number of

witnesses.

Hence, the Learned Magistrate simply dismissing the application on the

basis that the Petitioner had failed to show that he took all necessary

precautions to prevent a crime being committed is not correct in this

case.

Hence, I decide that the order of Learned Magistrate of Nochchiyagama

dated 01.09.2022 too be set aside in this revision.

Therefore, this revision application is allowed.

I direct that the machine (Backhoe) bearing engine No. 08432 and

bearing chassis No. 19308 be released to the Petitioner.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this Judgement to the

High Court of Anuradhapura and the Magistrate Court of

Nochchiyagama.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL