IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

~------------------------------------------------~

Hadira Gamage Agnes Nona

Pugalla, Kitalawa.

PLAINTIFF

C.A. Case No. 713/1999 (F) ~Vs~

D.C. Kuliyapitiya Case No. 7727/P

1. Adikari Mudiyanselage Padmasiri

No. 130, Kuliyapitiya Road,

Hettipola.

2. A.A. Jocelyn Nona,

3. Dissanayake Mudiyanselage Jinadasa,

4. Dissanayake Mudiyanselage Nandasiri,

5. S.P.Jane Nona,

Sa. A.A. Maiappuhamy

(Substituted 5th Defendant)

6. A.A. Maiappuhamy,

7. A.A.T. Wickramasinghe

All of Pugalla, Kitalawa.

DEFENDANTS

AND BETWEEN

A.A. Maiappuhamy (Deceased)

Pugalla, Kitalawa.

5(a) and 6th DEFENDANT ~APPELLANT

1

%i L

Athurigi Arachchige Teslin Wickramasinghe.

Pugalla, Kitalawa.

Substituted 5(a) and 6th DEFENDANT~ APPELLANT

Hadira Gamage Agnes Nona (Deceased)

Pugalla, Kitalawa.

PLAINTIFF~RESPONDENT

J ayakody Mudiyanselage Ranasighe,

Pugalla, Kitalawa.

Substituted PLAINTIFF RESPONDENT

1. Adikari Mudiyanselage Padmasiri

No. 130, Kuliyapitiya Road,

Hettipola.

2. A.A. Jocelyn Nona,

3. Dissanayake Mudiyanselage Jinadasa,

4. Dissanayake Mudiyanselage Nandasiri,

7. A.A. T. Wickramasinghe

All of Pugalla, Kitalawa.

DEFENDANT ~ RESPONDENTS

NOW BETWEEN

Athurigi Arachchige T eslin Wickramasinghe,

Pugalla, Kitalawa.

Substituted 5(a) and 6th DEFENDANT ~ APPELLANT ~ PETITIONER 2

I

r. t

BEFORE

COUNSEL

~Vs~

Hadira Gamage Agnes Nona (Deceased),

Pugalla, Kitalawa.

PLAINTIFF~RESPONDENT ~RESPONDENT

J ayakody Mudiyanselage Ranasighe,

Pugalla, Kitalawa.

Substituted PLAINTIFF~RESPONDENT ~

RESPONDENT

1. Adikari Mudiyanselage Padrnasiri,

No. 130, Kuliyapitiya Road,

Hettipola.

2. A.A. Jocelyn Nona,

3. Dissanayake Mudiyanselage Jinadasa,

4. Dissanayake Mudiyanselage Nandasiri,

7. A.A.T. Wickrarnasinghe

All of Pugalla, Kitalawa.

DEFENDANT ~RESPONDENT ~ RESPONDENTS

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,j.

Upul Kumarapperuma Dissanayake for the Sea) Appellant.

with Udumbara and 6th Defendant~

Wasantha Kahathuduwa for the 3rd and 4 th

Defendant~ Respondents.

3

Decided on

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,J.

R. Chula Bandara with Mangala Jivendra for the

Plaintiff~Respondent and 2nd Defendant~ Respondent.

26.11.2016

The Plaintiff~Respondent (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "the Plaintiff")

instituted this action seeking a partition of a land described in the schedule to the

plaint as Gorakagahamulalanda and Kongagamulahena. Initially the Plaintiff named

four Defendants to the action and since one Jane Nona, her husband Maiappuhamy and

their son T eslin Wickremasinghe also came forward at the preliminary survey to claim

two contiguous lots of the land sought to be partitioned, they were respectively added

as 5th, 6th and th Defendants. In the preliminary Plan bearing No.938 and report

returned to court by the licensed surveyor A.B.M. Weber, the two lots of the land

claimed by the 5th, 6th and th Defendants are depicted as Lots 1 and 4. It has to be noted

that though lots 1 and 4 claimed by the 5th, 6th and th Defendants were included by the

Plaintiff and shown to the surveyor as parts of the land sought to be partitioned, the

Plaintiff had not allotted any share entitlements to the 5th, 6th and th Defendants~vide

the plaint dated 30.04.1985.

Statement of Claim of the 5t\ 6th and 1h Defendants

The 5t\ 6th and th Defendants, filing their joint statement of claim dated 22.08.1988,

averred that the land described in the schedule to the plaint had already been

partitioned in the District Court of Kurunegala Case No. 12817 and since the final

partition on 24.01.1930, the parties had been in possession of their respective lots. By

pleading their own mode of devolution of rights, the 5th, 6th and th Defendants sought

the dismissal of the action on the ground of res judicata and that they had acquired

prescriptive rights to Lots 1 and 4 as depicted in preliminary Plan bearing No. 938.

4

\! !

This position of the 5th, 6th and i h Defendants is quite consistent with the stance they

had taken before the surveyor namely in item 8 of the report returned to Court by the

surveyor, it is specifically mentioned that the 5th Defendant (Maiappu), 6th Defendant

and i h Defendants claimed Lots 1 and 4 as depicted in the preliminary plan~see page

201 of the brief wherein one finds item No. 8 of the report. Mr. Upul Kumarapperuma

contended that Lots I and 4 as shown in the preliminary Plan No. 938 cannot form part

of the corpus and the claim of the 5th, 6th and i h Defendants was that Lots 1 and 4

should be excluded from the corpus. The testimony of the Plaintiff herself went to

establish this assertion of the Defendants. The Plaintiff Agnes Nona was cross~

examined on an alternative plan (Plan No. 159 commissioned by the Defendants) and

most importantly the Plaintiff admitted that the land on the eastern side was wrongly

included in the preliminary survey (see page 95 of the appeal brief). It has to be

highlighted that Lots 1 and 4 in the preliminary plan correspond to Lots 3, 4 and 5 of

the alternative Plan No 159 and it is noteworthy that the Plaintiff admitted Lots 3, 4

and 5 in the alternative plan to be those of the 5t\ 6th and i h Defendants.

If Lots 3, 4 and 5 in the alternative plan belong to the 5th, 6th and i h Defendants, the

Plaintiff could not have incorporated them in the schedule to the plaint, thus increasing

the extent of the corpus to be more than what it should be. A perusal of the preliminary

Plan No. 938 and alternative Plan bearing No. 159 would show that the lots claimed by

the 5t\ 6th and i h Defendants lie on the eastern side and on her own admission of the

Plaintiff, it is clear that she did incorporate them in the corpus sought to be partitioned.

Upon a perusal of the proceedings in the District Court, it is quite clear that the

Plaintiff does not co~own Lots 3, 4 and 5 as shown in the alternative plan.

Mr. Upul Kumarapperuma sought to impugn the judgment dated 31.08.1999 on a more

fundamentally important aspect of partition law namely the corpus has not been

properly identified by the Plaintiff and the exact land was not surveyed. It was

contended by Mr. Upul Kumarapperuma that the action must be dismissed on this

ground. If the Plaintiff has wrongly brought Lots 1 and 4 as shown in the preliminary

5

plan into the corpus and she admits that fact at the trial, one cannot seek partition of

land that does not belong to oneself.

I have already pointed out that the Plaintiff depicted the corpus to be partitioned by

giving specific boundaries but the schedule to the plaint refers only to northern, eastern

and southern boundaries and there is no reference to the western boundary r

demarcating the land. Interestingly enough, the preliminary Plan bearing No. 938

shows that the corpus is demarcated by four boundaries. In fact the schedule to the

plaint speaks of a road reservation lying on the eastern boundary but in the preliminary

plan no such reservation could be observed. It was suggested to the Plaintiff in cross-

examination that there is some more extent of land that lies on the western boundary,

which has not been brought to the corpus and this failure on the part of the Plaintiff to

bring in portions of land that lie on the western side demonstrates that she has sought

to enhance the extent of the corpus sought to be partitioned by bringing in Lots 1 and 4

as in the preliminary plan. The Plaintiff's admission confirmed this position.

In G.A.D.P.de S. Jayasuriya v. A.M Ubaid 61 NLR 352, Sansoni J. held that in a

partition action there is a duty cast on the judge to satisfy himself as to the identity of

the land sought to be partitioned, and for this purpose it is always open to him to call

for further evidence (in a regular manner) to make a proper investigation.

In the circumstances, Issue No. 1 raised on behalf of the Plaintiff could not have been

answered in the affirmative by the learned District Judge. Issue No 1 went as follows:

"Has the land described in the schedule to the plaint as Gorakagahamulalanda

and Kongagamulahena, which has been surveyed Surveyor Weber on 02.06.l986,

been depicted as Lots 1, 2 and 3 in the Plan bearing No. 9387"

In fact the learned District Judge has answered the aforesaid issue in the affirmative,

when the Plaintiff herself admitted that Lot 1 was not hers. When Lot 1 belongs to the

5th, 6th and 7th Defendants and they have not been allotted any shares, it doesn't stand to

reason that Lot 1 could have formed part of the corpus, leave alone Lot 4. There is also

no evidence that Lot 1 is co-owned by the Plaintiff.

6

It is imperative that the District Judge must indulge in a thorough investigation of tide

and when this has not happened, more particularly in the case of the Plaintiff when she

has established the identity of the land, an essential ingredient necessary to partition

the land has not been established.

Accordingly I hold that the Plaintiff's action would stand dismissed having regard to

the fact that the identity of the land sought to be partitioned has not been established.

In the circumstances I set aside the judgment dated 31.08.1999 and allow the appeal of

the 5th, 6th and th Defendants.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

7

[

\I;