==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Orders in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and

Mandamus under Article 140 of the

Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Mohamed Zarook Mohamed

Basith,

No. 24/2B, Hill Street, Dehiwela.

CA (Writ) App. No. 86/2021

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. Urban Development Authority,

6th and 7th Floors, Sethsiripaya, Battaramulla. 2. Harshan De Silva

Chairman, Urban Development Authority, 6th and 7th Floors, Sethsiripaya, Battaramulla.

2A. Nimesh Herath

Chairman, Urban Development Authority, 9th Floor, Sethsiripaya, Battaramulla.

2B. Eng. L.B. Kumudu Lal

Chairman, Urban Development Authority,

2

9th Floor, Sethsiripaya, Stage I, Battaramulla.

3. N.P.K Ranaweera,

Director General, Urban Development Authority, 6th and 7th Floors, Sethsiripaya, Battaramulla

3A. Mahinda Withanaarachchi

Director General, Urban Development Authority, 7th Floor, Sethsiripaya, Stage I, Battaramulla.

4. Dehiwela Mount Lavinia

Municipal Council, Galle Road, Dehiwela.

5. Mahinda Rajapaksha,

Hon. Minister of Urban Development and Housing Facilities, The Ministry of Urban Development and Housing Facilities, 17th and 18th Floors, Sethsiripaya, Battaramulla.

5A. Prasanna Ranatunga,

Hon. Minister of Urban Development and Housing, Ministry of Urban Development and Housing, 2nd Floor, "Sethsiripaya" Battaramulla. 5B. Anura Karunathilaka

Hon. Minister of Urban Development and Housing, Ministry of Urban Development, Constructions and Housing, 12th Floor, "Sethsiripaya", Stage- II Battaramulla.

3

6. Sirinimal Perera, Secretary,

Ministry of Urban Development and Housing Facilities 17th and 18th Floors, Sethsiripaya, Battaramulla 6A W.S. Sathyananda,

Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development and Housing, 17th Floor"Suhurupaya, Battaramulla. 6B. Ranjith Ariyaratne,

Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development, Constructions and Housing, 12th Floor, "Sethsiripaya", Stage- II Battaramulla. 7. MJ & ML Engineering

Construction (Pvt) Ltd, No. 245/12, 3/2, Hill House Gardens, Dehiwela.

RESPONDENTS

4

Before: Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Counsel:

Ruwantha Cooray with Naamiq Nafath instructed by Ramzi Bacha Associates for the

Petitioner.

Rajika Aluwihare, S.C. for the 1st to 3rd and 5th and 6th Respondents.

W. Dayartne, P.C. with Ranjika Jayawardene for the 4th Respondent.

Sanjaya Rajaratnam, P.C with Jude Dinesh for the 7th Respondent.

Argument on: 06.02.2026

Delivered on: 03.08.2026

5

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Judgement

Introduction

The Petitioner is a resident residing at No. 24/2B, Hill Street, Dehiwala, and the 7th Respondent,

who is the owner of the premises bearing No. 24/2, Hill Street, Dehiwala, has obtained a

Development Certificate, which is marked and annexed to the Petition as X6. The X6 has been

issued by the 1st Respondent, the Urban Development Authority (hereinafter referred to as the

"UDA"), to erect a building consisting of six floors and three parking floors, comprising 24

apartment housing units. The land on which the proposed building is to be constructed is in

extent of 22.72 Perches (574.65 square metres). According to the Development Permit, the

floor area of the building is 2927.82 square metres. The Petitioner challenges the said proposed

Development Certificate marked as X6 and the approved Building Plan marked as X7 on

several grounds.

One ground is that the said X6 has been issued in violation of the regulations marked as X9(c),

being the regulations under which the UDA has issued the certificate.

The next ground on which the Petitioner challenges X6 is that X6 and X7, which is the Building

Plan, are also violative of Regulation 96.

In addition to that, the Building and Street Line Certificate issued by the 4th Respondent, the

Municipal Council of Mount Lavinia, is contrary to the regulations applicable to the 4th

Respondent, which are marked as X12. Further, the Building Line applicable to that area is

violative of the regulations marked as X9(c).

Therefore, the Petitioner has sought inter alia the following relief;

6

" B. Make order in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution, and call for and examine

the entire record maintained by the 1st Respondent and the 4th Respondent, pertaining

to premises bearing Assessment No. 24/2, Hill Street, Dehiwala;

C. Grant and issue mandates in the nature of Writ of Certiorari, quashing the

purported Development Permit marked 'X6' and/or any renewal of the said

Development Permit issued in the name of the 7th Respondent and/or any other

Development Permit issued in the name of the 7th Respondent contained therein in

respect of premises bearing Assessment No. 24/2, Hill Street, Dehiwala;

D. Grant and issue mandates in the nature of Writ of Certiorari, quashing the

underlying decision contained in the purported Development Permit marked 'X6'

and/or any renewal of the said Development Permit and/or any other Development

Permit issued in the name of the 7th Respondent in respect of premises bearing

Assessment No. 24/2, Hill Street, Dehiwala.

E. Grant and issue mandates in the nature of Writ of Certiorari, quashing the approval

of the 1st Respondent Authority and/or the underlying decision of the 1st Respondent

Authority in approving the purported Building Plan marked 'X7' and/or any amended

Building Plan and/or any other Building Plan in respect of premises bearing

Assessment No. 24/2, Hill Street, Dehiwala.

F. Grant and issue mandates in the nature of Writ of Certiorari, quashing the approval

of the 4th Respondent Municipal Council and/or the underlying decision of the 4th

Respondent Municipal Council in approving the Survey Plan bearing No. 2448

aforesaid marked 'X11(d)' in respect of premises bearing Assessment No. 24/2, Hill

Street, Dehiwala.

7

G. Grant and issue mandates in the nature of Writ of Certiorari, quashing the Street

Line/Building Line Certificate marked as 'X12' issued by the 4th Respondent Municipal

Council and/or the underlying decision of the 4th Respondent Municipal Council to

issue the Street Line/Building Line Certificate marked as in respect of premises bearing

Assessment No. 24/2, Hill Street, Dehiwala.

H. Grant and issue mandates in the nature of Writ of Prohibition prohibiting any one

or more of the 1st to 4th Respondents and their employees, servants or anyone acting

under them from issuing a Certificate of Conformity and/or any other approval to any

building that is being constructed at premises bearing Assessment No. 24/2, Hill Street,

Dehiwala, save and except as provided for by the law;

I. Grant and issue mandates in the nature of Writ of Mandamus compelling the 1st to

2nd to demolish the illegally and unlawfully constructed building that is being

constructed at premises bearing Assessment No. 24/2, Hill Street, Dehiwala, in terms

of the Urban Development Act (as amended);” [Emphasis is mine]

On a perusal of the record, I found that the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 5th, 6th, and 8th Respondents have filed

their separate Objections and, by their Objections, they have sought the dismissal of the

Application. However, according to the said Objections of the said Respondents, the

Development Plan and the Development Certificate had been approved, since there was

compliance with all the requirements according to the regulations. Therefore, they deny the

allegations directed against them by the Petitioner. The 7th Respondent has filed the Statement

of Objections, denying the allegations levelled against him, and has further sought a dismissal

of this Application.

Thereafter, responding to the Objections filed by the Respondents, Counter Affidavits were

filed by the Petitioner.

8

However, when this matter came up for argument before me on 06.02.2026, the learned

Counsel for all the Respondents, including Mr. Aluwihare, who appeared for the 1st to 3rd and

6th Respondents; Mr. W. Dayaratne, President's Counsel, who appeared for the 4th Respondent;

and Mr. Sanjaya Rajaratnam, President's Counsel, who appeared for the 7th Respondent

developer, raised preliminary objections with regard to the maintainability of this Application

on the basis that the main relief sought by the Petitioner is principally against the 7th

Respondent, namely, to quash the approval of the Development Certificate and approved

Building Plan issued by the UDA, marked as X6 and X7 respectively.

Therefore, by now, the one-year period has lapsed, and those certificates have also lapsed,

particularly X6 and X7.

Accordingly, the relief sought to quash those certificates has also been rendered academic.

Since the matter has become an academic exercise, it was contended that these proceedings

need not proceed any further.

In addition to that, all the other certificates issued by the relevant agencies, including the

Electricity Board and the Fire Brigade, are also valid only for one year.

In addition to that, it was further admitted by all learned Counsel that, before the stay order in

this case was issued, construction had already commenced under the original Development

Certificate. Thereafter, from time to time, the stay order was extended, and the construction

has now come to a halt. It was further submitted that, even if the 7th Respondent wishes to

proceed with the construction, he would have to renew his application and obtain fresh

approvals, as the previous approvals cannot now be relied upon. Therefore, it was contended

that this application cannot be maintained against the Respondents. On that basis, all parties

tendered their respective submissions.

9

It is argued on behalf of the 7th Respondent, basically, that whatever relief is sought against the

7th Respondent is to stop the building by quashing P6, the Development Certificate, and P7,

the approved Building Plan. Therefore, after the stay order, although the building had already

commenced prior to the issuance of the stay order, the construction no longer continued

thereafter by the developer. Further, the 7th Respondent never sought the renewal of those

certificates and, in addition to that, has never made an application to renew them after the lapse

of those certificates. Therefore, it has now rendered it nugatory for the Petitioner to maintain

this application, since he has sought to quash the two certificates, P6 and P7, which have

already lapsed.

Therefore, if this Court proceeds with the main arguments on the merits, or directs the parties

to advance their main arguments and thereafter decides the matter on the merits, that would

merely be an academic exercise.

The other learned Counsel, Mr. Aluwihare, having associated himself with the same argument,

further argued that the Petitioner has not come before Court with clean hands. In addition to

what was submitted by Mr. Rajaratnam, learned Counsel appearing for the 1st to 3rd, 5th, and

6th Respondents submitted that the Petitioner has not come with clean hands because he has

suppressed the fact that construction had already commenced after the issuance of the

Development Certificate and the approved Building Plan.

In addition to that, certain other preliminary objections were also raised by Mr. Aluwihare by

way of his written Statement of Objections. Nevertheless, it is also his application that this

Application be dismissed since there is no purpose in the Petitioner obtaining the writs sought,

as the matter has now become merely academic.

I have considered the facts pleaded in the Petition by the Petitioner. Accordingly, the Petitioner

basically challenges the Development Certificate, X6 issued on the basis that it is violative of

10

the regulations issued by the 1st Respondent. The land is situated within a high-density

commercial area coming under the Dehiwala–Mount Lavinia Municipal Council. The

regulations applicable to such buildings are marked as X9(c). The Petitioner challenges the

proposed high-rise building of nine floors on the basis that the said Building Plan could not

have been approved due to inter alia following reasons.

According to the extent of the land, such a high-rise building comprising three parking floors

and six residential floors cannot be erected due to the length and width of the land, which is

violative of the applicable regulations.

In addition to that, it is the Petitioner's contention that the roadway leading to the proposed

building site is less than nine metres in width and also ends in a dead end. Therefore, since the

roadway leading to the proposed building exceeds 30 metres in length, there should be a turning

circle of the required diameter, which the 7th Respondent has not provided.

Therefore, it is contended that the Building Plan approved, together with the Street Line

Certificate approved by the Municipal Council, is also violative of the applicable regulations.

As such, the Development Permit, X6 and the Building Plan marked as X7 are violative of the

regulations issued by the 1st Respondent under the UDA Law, as well as the regulations of the

Municipal Council.

Therefore, initially, the Petitioner obtained a stay order. Although construction had commenced

prior to the issuance of the stay order, it is common ground that, after the stay order was issued,

there was no further progress in the construction.

In addition to that, the Development Permit, X6 and the approved Building Plan, X7, were

issued only for a duration of one year, and within that one-year period the 7th Respondent did

not complete the building.

11

Therefore, those approvals have already lapsed. As such, each and every one of the main reliefs

prayed for, from prayers (C) to (I), has been rendered nugatory because there is no useful

purpose in granting them. It is, as the learned Counsel argued, akin to ‘flogging a dead horse’.

Therefore, as correctly argued by learned Counsel, it is my view that this application should be

dismissed.

However, an argument was advanced by the Petitioner in answer to the same preliminary

objections, as reflected in the written submissions, that the Petitioner has also sought a Writ of

Prohibition as prayed for in prayer (H), whereby the Petitioner seeks to prevent the 1st to 6th

Respondents from issuing a ‘Certificate of Conformity’ in respect of the building for

operational and occupation purposes.

However, the issuance of a Certificate of Conformity would not arise unless the building is

completed. The construction of the building has already been stayed after the issuance of the

stay order in this case. Accordingly, it is my view that there is no purpose in proceeding with

this application, and, as such, this application is dismissed without costs.

To buttress my view above, I rely on the observations of Justice Surasena Ajith Hiran

Samarasundera and Others v. Dehiwala-Mount Lavinia Municipal Council and Others1;

This court also observes that the main prayer of the petitioner is to obtain a writ of

certiorari to quash development permits produced marked P9(a) and P9(b). It is a fact

that the validity period in both the said permits have now lapsed. Therefore, this Court

is of the view that quashing the said two permits would anyway be futile. In these

circumstances this court decides not to entertain this application. Therefore, this court

1 CA/WRT/0396/2017 (CA Minutes 10.07.2018).

12

decides to refuse to issue notices on the respondents and proceed to dismiss this

application without Cost (at page 05).

However, in the future, I will keep this matter open in the event the 7th Respondent seeks

permission from the relevant Respondents to obtain a fresh Development Certificate and an

approved Building Plan based on the same plan. In such circumstances, if the Petitioner has a

cause of action based on the same facts, it will be open to him to assert his rights by way of a

separate application.

Conclusion

Accordingly, for the reasons adumbrated above, I am compelled to dismiss this Application,

without costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL