Page 1 of 5

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application under the

Provincial High Court Act No. 19 of 1990 (Special Provisions) read together with Section 154(G) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Officer in Charge Police Station Ragama Complainant

Vs.

1. K. J. Tyrone Silva

No. 1054/A, Lanka Matha Mawatha, Duwawatta, Ragama

1st Party 2. H W Manjula de Silva

No. 139/5 Kadawatha road, Ragama

2nd Party AND BETWEEN

K. J. Tyrone Silva No. 1054/A, Lanka Matha Mawatha, Duwawatta, Ragama 1st Party - Petitioner VS

1. H W Manjula de Silva

No. 139/5 Kadawatha road, Ragama

2nd Party Respondent

Court of Appeal Case No: CA PHC 43/2018 Negombo High Court Revision Application: HCRA 310/17 Negombo MC No: 11530/16

Page 2 of 5

2. Officer in Charge Police Station Ragama

Complainant- Respondent AND NOW BETWEEN

K. J. Tyrone Silva No. 1054/A, Lanka Matha Mawatha, Duwawatta, Ragama

1st Party Petitioner-Appellant VS

1. H. W. Manjula de Silva

No. 139/5 Kadawatha road, Ragama

2nd Party Respondent-Respondent

2. Officer in Charge Police Station Ragama

Complainant- Respondent -Respondent

Before:

Prasantha De Silva, J.

K.K.A.V. Swarnadhipathi, J.

Counsel:

Eshanthi Mendis for the 2nd Party-Respondent-Respondent-Respondent. P. L. Gunawardene for the 1st Party-Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant. Parties agree to dispose this matter by way of written submissions. Written Submissions:

filed on

02.02.2023 for the 2nd Party Respondent - Respondent - Respondent

03.03.2023 for the 1st Party Respondent - Petitioner Appellant Delivered on: 21.03.2023

Page 3 of 5

Prasantha De Silva, J.

Judgment

The Officer-in-Charge of the Police Station Ragama had filed an information in terms of section

66 of the Primary Courts Procedure Act No.44 of 1979 upon a complaint made on 28.06.2016

by Karunayake Jude Tyron Silva against Hettihewage Viswajith Manjula De Silva. The said

Karunayake Jude Tyron Silva and Hettihewage Viswajith Manjula De Silva were made 1st Party

Respondent and 2nd Party Respondent respectively.

According to the complaint made by the said 1st Party-Respondent, he has a 23 perch block of

land in Ragama, Kadawatha Road, at Horape Temple Junction. Case bearing No. 1012/L has

been instituted in the District Court of Gampaha to have the boundaries of the said land

demarcated. The 1st Party- Respondent had been informed by the adjoining landowner that a

backhoe machine operator was removing earth and covering the road which leads to the

southern boundary of the land of the 1st Party-Respondent.

According to the complaint made by the 1st Party- Respondent, the 2nd Party- Respondent has

forcibly encroached the land of the 1st Party-Respondent and widened the road adjacent to the

southern boundary of the 1st Party-Respondents land using a backhoe without any permission.

1st Party- Respondent has also stated that the 6-feet wide road had been expanded to 12 feet with

the intention of using it as a parking lot to park vehicles coming to the service centre run by the

2nd Party-Respondent.

The 2nd Party-Respondent pursuant to the complaint of the 1st Party-Respondent had made a

statement to the Police Station-Ragama on 01.07.2016. He had stated in the above complaint

that there was no road being widened and that all he did was remove earth from his land and

put it on the road as soil on the road was washed off due to rain.

Pursuant to the information filed according to the above complaints, the learned Magistrate who

was acting as the Primary Court Judge had followed the procedure stipulated in section 66(1)(a)

of the Primary Courts Procedure Act No. No. 44 of 1979 and inquired into the dispute between

1st Party- Respondent and 2nd Party- Respondent. The learned Magistrate had held against the

1st Party-Respondent and decided the matter in terms of Section 69(1) of the said Act and made

an order on 20.06.2017 under Section 69(2) in favour of the 2nd Party-Respondent.

Being aggrieved by the said order, the 1st Party-Respondent-Petitioner had invoked the

revisionary jurisdiction of the Provincial High Court of Western Province holden in Negombo

Page 4 of 5

seeking to have the order of the learned Magistrate dated 20.06.2017 set aside. Having inquired

into the matter, the learned High Court Judge had held there is no reason to interfere with the

order of the learned Magistrate and dismissed the application of the 1st Party-Respondent-

Petitioner. Being dissatisfied with the order of the learned High Court Judge dated 29.03.2018,

the 1st Party-Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant) has

preferred this appeal.

It was alleged by the Appellant that the 2nd Party-Respondent-Respondent-Respondent

(hereinafter referred to as the Respondent) has encroached a portion of his land and widened

the road on the southern boundary by filling it using a backhoe with the intention of expanding

6 feet wide road to 12 feet. It was further alleged that a concrete post belonging to the Ceylon

Electricity Board has also been broken down. The Respondent had denied the said allegations

and stated that he has not widened the road and that width of the impugned road was 10 feet.

He has further stated that he used a backhoe to remove soil from his land in order to put it on

the road as the soil on the road was washed off due to rain. The 2nd Party-Respondent has also

stated that a concrete electricity post was not broken down by him and that what he removed

was a broken lamppost partly buried under soil.

It is evident from the evidence placed before the learned Magistrate that Appellant had not

substantiated the said allegations levelled against the Respondent. Therefore, it is apparent that

the learned Magistrate has come to the correct findings of fact and law and held against the

Appellant.

It should be noted that that Ragama Police had visited the disputed area and investigated the

complaint of the Appellant. According to the investigation notes dated 29.06.2016 and sketch

submitted by the Police, the impugned disputed roadway has no physical boundaries or

demarcations. The entry to the roadway had been cleaned and filled with earth and it had been

visible that width of the impugned road is about 10 feet wide. The said investigation notes

revealed that no serious damage has been caused to the disputed area of land, particularly to the

Appellants land and it was brought to the notice of Court that there is a land matter pending in

the District Court of Gampaha.

The learned High Court Judge too has analyzed and evaluated the evidence placed before the

learned Magistrate and decided that the learned Magistrate has come to the correct findings of

fact and law and held in favour of the 2nd Party-Respondent-Respondent-Respondent in the

instant action. It is seen there is no miscarriage of justice or any injustice caused to the Appellant

by the findings of the learned Magistrate. Thus, the Appellant has not shown any exceptional

Page 5 of 5

circumstances which shock the conscience of Court to have the revisionary jurisdiction of the

Provincial High Court invoked.

In view of the aforesaid reasons, I hold that learned Primary Court Judge has properly exercised

jurisdiction under section 69 of the Primary Courts Procedure Act No. 44 of 1979. As such, the

learned Magistrate is empowered to make an order declaring that the 2nd Party-Respondent-

Respondent-Respondent is entitled to use 10 feet wide roadway pertaining to the instant action.

Therefore, the learned High Court Judge was right in refusing to intervene with the order dated

20.06.2017 of the learned Magistrate/ Primary Court Judge.

As it was revealed that a civil case is pending in the District Court of Gampaha over demarcation

of boundaries, parties are entitled to get a permanent solution to the impugned dispute from the

relevant civil court.

Thus, I refuse to interfere with the order of the learned High Court Judge. Therefore, the appeal

stands dismissed.

Appeal dismissed with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K.K.A.V. Swarnadhipathi, J. I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL