==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of

Article 138(1) of the Constitution read

with Section 11(1) of the High Court of the

Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19

of 1990 read with Section 331 of the Code

of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979

The Officer in Charge,

Police Station,

Embilipitiya

Complainant

Court of Appeal Case No: Vs,

CA/(PHC)0005/2024

High Court of Embilipitya

Case No. HCE/RA/19/2022

Magistrates Court of Embilipitiya

Case No. 54744/18 Hiripurage Chithralatha,

Kumara Timber Mill, 99,

Gangeyaya, Embilipitiya

Applicant

And Between

Hiripurage Chithralatha,

Kumara Timber Mill, 99,

Gangeyaya, Embilipitiya

Applicant-Petitioner

2

Vs,

01. The Officer in Charge,

Police Station,

Embilipitiya

Complainant-Respondent

02. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12

Respondent

And Now Between

Hiripurage Chithralatha,

Kumara Timber Mill, 99,

Gangeyaya, Embilipitiya

Applicant-Petitioner-Appellant

Vs,

01. The Officer in Charge,

Police Station,

Embilipitiya

Complainant-Respondent-Respondent

02. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12

Respondent-Respondent

Before: Amal Ranaraja, J.

Dr. Sumudu Premachandra, J.

3

Counsel: Randunu Heellage with Pravindika Kularathna for the

Petitioner

Wishwa Wijesuriya, SC for the Respondent

Argued on: 02.09.2026

Judgment on: 21.09.2026

Judgment

Amal Ranaraja. J,

1. On May 20th, 2018, officers of the Embilipitiya Police Station have

arrested persons named, Hiripurage Kumaradasa and Nawamuni

Arachchige Chathuranga for transporting Teak timber logs valued Rs.

45,971.24 without the valid permit. This has occurred in a vehicle

bearing Registration Number 42!" 0836

2. Thereafter, the officer in charge of the Embilipitya police has instituted

proceedings in the Embilipitya Magistrates Court, against the persons

referred to above for illegally transporting Teak timber logs, an offence

punishable under Section 24(1) read with Sections 25(2) and 40 of the

Forest Ordinance No.16 of 1907 (as Amended). The accused upon

pleading guilty to the charge have been convicted of the charge and

sentenced.

4

3. Subsequently, a confiscation inquiry has been held regarding the

vehicle bearing Registration No. 42!" 0836. By order dated November

14th, 2022, the learned Magistrate has ordered the confiscation of the

said vehicle. Aggrieved by the order, the registered owner petitioner-

appellant (hereinafter referred to as the appellant) has filed an

application in revision (RA/19/22) in the High Court of Embilipitya.

4. The learned High Court Judge by the order dated November 28th , 2023,

has dismissed the revision application and affirmed the order of the

learned Magistrate. The appellant also being aggrieved by the order of

the learned High Court Judge of Embilipitya, dated November

28th,2023, has preferred the instant appeal to this Court.

5. It is common ground, that the officer in charge at the Embilipitiya police

has instituted proceedings against, Hiripurage Kumaradasa and

Nawamuni Arachchige Chathuranga for illegally transporting Teak

timber logs valued at Rs. 45,971.24 on May 20th,2018, thereby

committing an offence punishable under Section 24(1) read with

Sections 25(2) and 40 of the Forest Ordinance No.16 of 1907 (as

Amended).

6. Section 40 of the Forest Ordinance No.16 of 1907 (as Amended)

provides as follows;

40.

(1) Where any person is convicted of a forest offence-

(a) all timber or forest produce which is not the property

of the State in respect of which such offence has been

committed; and

(b) all tools, vehicles, implements, cattle and machines

used in committing such offence,

5

shall in addition to any other punishment speci?ied for such offence, be

con?iscated by Order of the convicting Magistrate:

Provided that in any case where the owner of such tools,

vehicles, implements and machines used in the

commission of such offence, is a third party, no Order of

Con?iscation shall be made if such owner proves to the

satisfaction of the Court that he had taken all

precautions to prevent the use of such tools, vehicles,

implements, cattle and machines, as the case may be, for

the commission of the offence.'.

(2) Any property forfeited to the State under subsection (1) shall

(a) if no appeal has been preferred to the Court of Appeal

against the relevant conviction, vest absolutely in the

State with effect from the date on which the period

prescribed for preferring an appeal against such

conviction expires;

(b) if an appeal has been preferred to the Court of Appeal

against the relevant conviction, vest absolutely in the

State with effect from the date on which such conviction

is af?irmed on appeal.

In this subsection, 'relevant conviction' means the conviction in

consequence of which any property is forfeited to the State under

subsection (1).'

7. Section 40 of the Forest Ordinance, states that upon a conviction, all

timber and forest produce that have been the subject matter of the

offence, and vehicles used for the commission of such offence, would

be confiscated. If the owner of the vehicle himself was the accused in

6

the preceding case, then the issue before the Court in a confiscation

inquiry will not be complicated. However, if the owner is a third party,

it would be necessary for a Court to ascertain whether the offence was

committed by a particular accused with the knowledge and the

connivance of the owner of the vehicle used for the commission of the

forest offence.

8. The owner of the vehicle must establish on a balance of probability,

that he took all precautions to prevent the vehicle from being used in

the commission of a forest offence. The specific precautions deemed

relevant will vary from case to case; there are no universal measures

that all vehicle owners must follow. It is crucial that the precautions

taken are convincing and clearly demonstrate the owner’s diligence.

Any actions that suggest a lack of sincerity or responsibility, may

undermine the owner’s position.

9. Further, in an inquiry in the nature of the one in question, the owner

of a vehicle is considered to be the person who has control over the

vehicle in issue.

10. In Oriental Finance Services Corporation Ltd vs Range Forest Officer

and Another [2011] 1 SLR 86, Sisira de Abrew, J, has stated,

“Who is the owner of the vehicle? This is the most important question

that must be decided in this case. Can it be said that the absolute owner

(the ?inance company) committed the offence or it was committed with

the knowledge or participation of the absolute owner. The answer is

obviously no. Surely a ?inance company cannot participate in the

commission of an offence of this nature when the vehicle is not with it.

It cannot be said that the ?inance company had the knowledge of the

commission of the offence when the vehicle was not with it. The owner

envisaged in the law cannot be the absolute owner.

7

In the present case the registered owner is the one who drove the

vehicle at the time of the commission of the offence. He was convicted

on his own plea. If the court is going to release the vehicle on the basis

that the owner of the vehicle is the absolute owner, then after the

release, it is possible for the absolute owner to give the vehicle to

another person. If this person commits a similar offence, the ?inance

company can take up the same position, and the vehicle would be again

released. Then where is the end to the commission of the offence? Where

is the end of the violation of the Forest Ordinance? There will be no end.

If the courts of this country take up this attitude the purpose of the

legislature in enacting the said provisions of the Forest Ordinance

would be defeated. In my view Courts should not interpret the law to

give an absurd meaning to the law.

In this connection I would like to consider a passage from

'Interpretation of Statutes by Bindra 7th edition page 235." It is a well-

known rule of construction that a statute should not be construed so as

to impute absurdity to the legislature."

For these reasons I hold that the owner envisaged in law is not the

absolute owner and the owner envisaged in law in a case of this nature

is the person who has control over the use of the vehicle. The absolute

owner has no control over the use of the vehicle except to retake the

possession of the vehicle for non-payment of instalments.

If the vehicle is con?iscated holding that the absolute owner is not the

owner envisaged in law, no injustice would be caused to him as he could

recover the amount he spent from the registered owner by way of

action in the District Court on the basis of violation of the agreement.”

8

11. The appellant being the registered owner of the vehicle bearing

Registration No. 42!" 0836 has maintained that she inspected the

vehicle at all times to ensure that it was not being used for illegal

purposes.

12. The appellant has also maintained that the vehicle in question was

fitted with a crane and was primarily used to move logs delivered to a

timber mill. Although the vehicle was mostly stationary, it was

occasionally employed to transport sawdust and the fine wood chips

produced during timber cutting and shaping. On the occasion at issue,

the vehicle had been taken to another well-known timber mill to be

loaded with sawdust, the vehicle was parked at such location, locked

and her son had brought the keys home that evening. The next

morning the appellant had apparently gone to the spot where the

vehicle had been parked overnight to ensure that nothing illegal had

been placed in/on it.

13. However, in his testimony the appellant’s son has stated that the

vehicle in issue had been taken into police custody on the same night

when it was parked at the other timber mill for loading purposes.

14. In those circumstances, the appellant would not have had an

opportunity to inspect the vehicle next morning to ascertain that no

illegal items had been placed in/on the vehicle and ensure that it was

not being used for illegal purposes. The appellant has offered no

explanation for this material discrepancy, which reveals

inconsistencies in her account and given Court grounds reject her

narrative.

15. Given these circumstances, both the learned Magistrate and the

learned High Court Judge have correctly determined that the appellant

9

has failed to establish, on a balance of probability, the legal

requirement specified in the proviso of Section 40 of the Forest

Ordinance No. 16 of 1907.

16. Accordingly, I am not inclined to interfere with the disputed orders of

the learned Magistrate and the learned High Court Judge dated,

November 14th, 2022, and November 28th,2023, respectively.

17. I hereby dismiss the appeal and make no order regarding costs.

Appeal dismissed

18. The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this Judgement to the

Magistrate’s Court in Embilipitya for information and compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Dr. Sumudu Premachandra, J.

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal