==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/157/2025

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979, read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: The Hon. Attorney General

CA/HCC/0157/2025 Attorney General’s Department

Colombo-12 High Court of Kurunegala Case No. HC/107/2022 COMPLAINANAT Vs. Hanunawe Gedera Victor Bandara

ACCUSED AND NOW BETWEEN Hanunawe Gedera Victor Bandara

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

CA/HCC/157/2025

2 | P a g e

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Prashan Wickramaratne for the Appellant.

Hiranjan Peiris, PC, ASG for the

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 12/05/2026 DECIDED ON : 30/06/2026

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted by the Attorney General on the following charge:

On or about the 29th September 2019 the accused committed the murder of

Madurupitiya Mudiyanselage Sanjeewa Premabandu Jayasinghe which is an

offence punishable under Section 296 of the Penal Code.

As the Appellant opted for a non-jury trial, the trial commenced before a

judge and the prosecution had led 04 witnesses and marked productions P1-

P3 and closed the case. The Learned High Court Judge having been satisfied

that the evidence presented by the prosecution warrants a case to be

answered, called for the defence and explained the rights of the accused.

CA/HCC/157/2025

3 | P a g e

The Appellant made a statement from the dock and closed his case.

Considered the evidence presented by the prosecution, the Learned High

Court Judge had found the Appellant guilty of the charge and sentenced him

to death on 19.12.2024.

Having been dissatisfied with the verdict, the Appellant lodged this appeal in

this court. The Learned Counsel for the Appellant argued the matter in

absence of the Appellant. At the time of argument, he was connected via the

Zoom platform from prison.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant had formulated two grounds of

appeal:

1. Whether the Learned High Court Judge erred in law by failing to

consider a lesser culpability of the Appellant based on the defences of

grave and sudden provocation and intoxication which are apparent

from the facts of the case, thereby resulting in a serious miscarriage

of justice.

2. Whether the facts and the circumstances of the case warrant the

imposition of a lenient sentence on the Appellant.

Facts of the case

According to the evidence presented, the Appellant, the deceased and PW1

were employed at a construction site for a petrol shed. The Appellant worked

as a security guard while PW1 and the deceased worked as labourers.

Although, several workers worked at the site, only the Appellant, PW1 and

the deceased had stayed at the site at night.

On the day of the incident, in the morning, the Appellant had left the site

informing everyone that he was going home. At about 10.00am the Appellant

had returned to the site and borrowed Rs.300/- from the deceased and left

the site again.

CA/HCC/157/2025

4 | P a g e

At about 4.30pm the Appellant had come to the site while being under the

influence of liquor and had engaged in a heated argument with the deceased.

Thereafter, the Appellant had started to yell at the deceased in filth. The

deceased, had grabbed the Appellant by his collar, and had dragged him

outside the site and thrown him onto the road.

Thereafter, the deceased and PW1 had continued their work. At about

10.00pm, PW1 had noticed that the machine which operated by the deceased

had stopped suddenly. When PW1 turned to that direction he had seen the

deceased falling down, and had seen the Appellant standing with a metal

pole. According to PW1, the Appellant had struck a blow on the neck region

of the deceased with the metal pole.

With much struggle, PW1 had grabbed the metal pole from the Appellant and

with the assistance of PW2, had dispatched the deceased to the hospital. The

deceased had succumbed to his injuries at the hospital. The Appellant was

arrested immediately.

According to the JMO who held the post mortem examination, it was noted

that the death was caused due to the fatal blunt trauma to the head of the

deceased. No alcohol was found in the blood sample of the deceased.

As the appeal grounds are interconnected, both counts will be considered

together in this appeal.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant at the very outset of the argument

invited this court to consider that this is an appropriate case to consider

under Section 297 of the Penal Code on the basis of grave and sudden

provocation.

The Learned Additional Solicitor General in keeping with the highest

traditions of the Attorney General’s Department did not object to the

proposal made by the Learned Counsel for the Appellant.

CA/HCC/157/2025

5 | P a g e

Exception 1 to Section 294 (Murder) of the Penal Code states as follows:

“Culpable homicide is not murder if the offender whilst deprived of the

power of self-control by grave and sudden provocation, cause the death

of the person who gave the provocation or causes the death of any

other person by mistake or accident”.

Explanation: - Whether the provocation was grave and sudden enough to

prevent the offence from amounting to murder is question of fact.

The Learned Counsel extended his argument on the basis that the facts and

circumstances of this case only warrant a sentence under the second limb

of Section 297 of the Penal Code.

Section 297 of the Penal Code states as follows:

Whoever commits culpable homicide not amounting to murder shall be

punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may

extend to twenty years, and shall also be liable to fine, if the act by which

the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or of causing

such bodily injury as is likely to cause death;

or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may

extend to ten years, or with fine, or with both, if the act is done with

the knowledge that it is likely to cause death, but without any intention

to cause death, or to cause such bodily injury as is likely to cause

death.

According to PW1, in his evidence it was admitted that the Appellant was

drunk at the time of the incident. This was not taken into consideration by

the Learned High Court Judge.

In Don Shamantha Jude Anthony Jayamaha v. The Attorney General

CA/303/2006 and C.A.L.A. 321/2006 decided on 11/07/2012 the Court

held that:

CA/HCC/157/2025

6 | P a g e

“It is trite law that even if the accused does not specifically take up the

defence of a general or special exception to criminal liability, if the facts

and circumstances before the court disclose that there were such

materials to sustain such a plea then the court must consider whether

the accused should be convicted for a lesser offence”.

In the case of King v. Albert Appuhamy 40 NLR 505 it was held:

“Failure on the part of a prisoner or his Counsel to take up a certain line of

defence does not relieve a Judge of the responsibility of putting to the jury

such defence if it arises on the evidence.”

In this case the prosecution evidence revealed that there is some degree of

voluntary intoxication on the part of the Appellant. Even in his allocutus, the

Appellant had told Court that he was drunk when the incident had taken

place. The final submissions made by the prosecution and the defence are

not available in the file.

In Jayathilaka v The Attorney General [2003] 1 SLR 107 the court held

that:

“Though the accused has not taken up the defence of intoxication if such

defence arises on the evidence, it is the duty of the jury to consider the

same”.

In The King v Bellana Vithanage Eddin 41 NLR 345 the court held that:

"In a charge of murder, it is the duty of the judge to put to the jury the

alternative of finding the accused guilty of culpable homicide not

amounting to murder when there is any basis for such a finding in the

evidence on record, although such defence was not raised nor relied upon

by the accused”.

CA/HCC/157/2025

7 | P a g e

In the case of King v. Withanalage Lanty 42 NLR 317 it was held:

“There was evidence in this case upon which it was open to the jury to say

that it came within exception 4 to section 294 of the Penal Code and that

the appellant was guilty of culpable homicide not amounting to murder. No

such plea, however, was put forward on his behalf. In the course of his

charge the presiding Judge referred to this evidence as part of the defence

story but not as evidence upon which a lesser verdict might possibly be

based. Held, that it was the duty of the presiding Judge to have so directed

the jury and that in the circumstances the appellant was entitled to have

the benefit of the lesser verdict.”

In the case of Queen V. Kularatne 71 NLR 529 it was held:

“that when an unsworn statement is made by the accused from the dock,

the jurors must be informed that such statement must be looked upon as

evidence, subject however to the infirmity that the accused had

deliberately refrained from giving sworn testimony. But the jury must also

be directed that (a) if they believe the unsworn statement, it must be acted

upon, (6) if it raises a reasonable doubt in their minds about the case for

the prosecution, the defence must succeed, and (e) that it should not be

used against another accused”.

In this case, the Learned High Court Judge had not considered the

intoxication when the Appellant was sentenced. Had the trial Judge

considered the intoxication of the Appellant, the Appellant should have been

sentenced under the second limb of Section 297 of the Penal Code.

Hence, considering all the circumstances of this case, I set aside the sentence

imposed on the Appellant and substitute it with a term of 10 years rigorous

imprisonment. A fine of Rs.1000/- with 06 months default sentence is also

imposed on the Appellant. Additionally, I order a compensation of

CA/HCC/157/2025

8 | P a g e

Rs.150,000/- to the deceased’s family with a default sentence of 1-year

simple imprisonment.

As the Appellant is in prison since the date of conviction by the Learned High

Court Judge, I order the sentence imposed by this Court to be operative from

the date of conviction, i.e., 19/12/2024.

Subject to the above variations, the appeal is dismissed.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Kurunegala along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL