I

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

C.A.No. HCC No.116/2014

H.C. Puttlam No.HC 64/2003

***********

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15/1979.

Udawaththage Don Prasanna Saman

Krishantha

1st Accused-Appellant

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo 12 .

Complainant- Respondent

o ,

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

DEVIKA ABEYRATNE, J.

Anil Silva P.e. with Dharmaraja Samarakoon for the 1st

Accused -Appellant

Disna Warnakula SSC for the respondent

14th February, 2020

08th July, 2020

****************

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, T.

The 1st accused-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant) was

indicted under three counts, along with four other accused. They were charged

with for being members of an unlawful assembly with the common object of

causing hurt to Hameed Hussain Marrikkar Zanoon on 29.07.1994 at Kalpitiya, and

whilst being members of that assembly they committed his murder. They were

also charged under committing murder with common murderous intention.

At the conclusion of the trial, in delivering its judgment, the trial Court

found the Appellant guilty to murder in respect of third count. He was acquitted

of counts one and two. The 2nd to 5th accused were acquitted of all counts.

2

, .

The prosecution case was that the Appellant served in Kalpitiya Police

Station during the relevant time as the Officer-in-Charge of the Special

Investigation Unit while the other accused acted as his subordinates.

The evidence for the prosecution reveal that the deceased, who was a

trader by profession was arrested by the officers attached to the SIU of Kalpitiya

Police on 23.07.1994 at 8.50 p.m. and on 29.07.1994 at 12.05 a.m. he was taken to

hospital, where he died after admission.

Witnesses Hameed Mansil said he went to Kalpitiya Police after the arrest of

the deceased and through the approval of the Appellant he was able to see him.

The deceased was at that time tied to a mango tree and the Appellant was seen

assaulting him with a club on his back. The witness pleaded with the Appellant

to release the deceased saying that he might die due to that assault. The

Appellant, having refused the request of the witness saying even if the President

orders he will not release the deceased, changed his stance at a subsequent point

of time demanding Rs. 200,000.00 from the witness for his release. The witness

admitted that the deceased was arrested on the charge of supplying fuel to LTTE

terrorists.

Anthony Tyrone Mirood too had been arrested on a similar allegation prior

to the arrest of the deceased. In order to save himself from torture, the witness

implicated the deceased as having a pistol in his possession. The witness admits

the deceased received Rs. 50,000.00 to Rs. 75,000.00 on a daily basis for supplying

3

, .

diesel and petrol to LTTE. After the arrest, the deceased was assaulted by the

Appellant using a club, while questioning him about the pistol. The Police have,

thereafter taken the deceased, who could not even sit properly due to assault, to

an area called Eluwankulama, in order to recover the pistol spoken to by the

witness, They returned empty handed, without making a recovery. The deceased

had unsuccessfully attempted to run away during this trip and had been

assaulted. That night the deceased had difficulty in breathing and the Appellant

instructed him to be admitted to hospital. He did not see the deceased on the

following morning and later learnt that he had died.

Witness Iftikar Mohammed is an Attorney-at-Law, who was retained by the

deceased's relatives to secure release of the deceased since he was being tortured

by Police for several days. He met the deceased for five minutes with permission

of the Appellant. The deceased was in a very poor state at that point of time and

said that he was harassed (CllO~O Cll@J) by the Police and pleaded with the witness

to save him.

Dr.Pubalasingham was attached to Kalpitiya Hospital as a medical officer

during this time and had examined the deceased on 28.07.1994, when he was

produced by the Police. The deceased complained about a police assault and had

bum injuries caused by lighted cigarettes. The witness had admitted the

deceased to his ward, but on the following morning, the Police have removed the

deceased from the hospital against medical advice. Following day the deceased

was brought back by the Police in a very critical condition. After his admission

4

, .

the deceased had died in the hospital and thereafter the Director of Health

Services of the area had taken over the case.

The post mortem examination of the deceased was performed by Dr,

Ratnayake, the acting JMO of Kurunegala Hospital. He had noted 32 external

injuries in total. In addition to 26 abrasions, the deceased had suffered

underlying contusions in seven of such abrasions, He noted three injuries,

numbered as 30, 31 and 32, located on his thighs, left elbow and rear side of left

upper arm respectively, which could have been caused by coming into contact

with a blunt object or due to an assault All the injuries may have been caused

within seven days of examination and none of them are, if taken individually,

could be considered as fatal.

In relation to the cause of death, the medical witness was of the opinion

that the severe pain caused by the multiple injuries could result in the heart

failure, Given the condition of the deceased's heart, which had most of its

coronary arteries blocked over 65% to 80%, his death could have been accelerated

with the infliction of injury Nos, 30, 31 and 32, Dr, L.B,L de Alwis, Consultant

JMO of Colombo, who examined deceased's heart, upon a request for an opinion

by Dr, Ratnayake, noted pre-existing Ischaemic Heart Decease, He agrees with the

opinion of Dc Ratnayake that the death was due to the said "Iscluzemic Heart

Decease precipitated by the injuries found on his body",

5

The prosecution led many other witnesses in relation to the investigations

conducted by the Police and the public agitation over the death in custody.

At the hearing of this appeal, learned President's Counsel relied upon a

solitary ground of appeal on the basis that the trial Court had failed to consider

the lesser culpability of the Appellant on knowledge. He invited attention of

Court to the evidence that only few injuries that could be attributable to the

Appellant since the evidence clearly indicate that he was assaulted by many

other officers during his period of detention in the KaZpitiya Police and it is due to

their cumulative effect that the death of the deceased had resulted by

aggravating an already existing heart decease. He also drew the attention of

Court to the fact that the prosecution failed to eliminate the possibility of a

supervening event which render the conviction for murder unsustainable.

Learned Senior State Counsel, in her reply contended that the Appellant

had total control over the deceased during his period of detention and it was due

to the cumulative effect of the injuries sustained during that time had resulted in

the death of the deceased. Therefore, she contended that the Appellant has had

the requisite knowledge of continued assault on the deceased would lead to his

death.

The ground of appeal raised by the Appellant requires an examination of

the applicable principles of law in the light of decided cases.

6

Section 293 of the Penal Code defines the offence of culpable homicide not

amounting to murder. This section contains three clauses. Third clause of Section

293 of the Penal Code reads as whoever causes death by doing an act ... "with the

knowledge that he is likely by such act to cause death, commits the offence of culpable

homicide".

Explanation 1 to Section 293 reads "A person who causes bodily injury to

another who is labouring under a disorder, decease, or bodily infirmity, and thereby

accelerates the death of that other, shall be deemed to have caused death."

The offence with which the Appellant was convicted is murder. Second

and third limbs of Section 294 of the Penal Code states that culpable homicide is

murder, if it is done with the intention of causing bodily injury as the offender

knows to be likely to cause the death of the person to whom the harm is caused

or if it is done with the intention of causing bodily injury to any person, and the

bodily injury intended to be inflicted is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature

to cause death.

The Court of Criminal Appeal, having compared the nature of knowledge

referred to in Section 293 and 294 of the Penal Code, by its judgment of

Somapala v The Queen 72 NLR 121, stated that;

" .. . it is noteworthy that the element of knowledge is specified only

in the third clause of s. 293, and again only in the 2nd and 4th

limbs of s. 294. This fact at least prima facie justifies a supposition

7

that the 2nd and 4th limbs of s. 294, under which knowledge is an

element of the offence of murder, are intended to correspond, not

with the second clause of s. 293, but instead with the third clause-of

the latter section. This third clause declares to be culpable homicide

"an act done with the knowledge that the offender is likely by such

act to cause death", and it is obvious that knowledge here comprises

both a general knowledge, i.e. held objectively, or a special

knowledge held subjectively with respect to the person injured. On

the other hand, the language of the 2nd limb of s. 294 prima facie

denotes only the subjective knowledge as to the likelihood of the

death of the person to whom the harm is caused. There is thus

evidence in the 2nd limb of s. 294 of a design to classify as murder

some but not all of the offences of culpable homicide defined in the

third clause of s. 293."

It appears that the Senior State Counsel is referring to second limb of

Section 294 of the Penal Code, in defending the conviction of murder.

In Charlis v The Queen 74 NLR 73, the Court of Criminal Appeal stated the

following on illustration (b) of Section 294 in relation to its second clause;

"The second illustration lettered (b) which follows almost

immediately after the statutory provision in s. 294 is clearly

intended to explain the meaning of the second limb of s. 294. That

illustration contemplates a case where A strikes Z with the

intention of causing bodily injury, and Z dies in consequence of the

8

blow, although the blow is not sufficient in the ordinary course of

nature to cause the death of a person in a sound state of health. The

illustration thereafter distinguishes between two alternative

situations :-

(1) If A knows that Z is labouring under some disease

because of which a blow is likely to cause his death, then A is

guilty of murder despite the fact that the case is not one

covered by the third limb of s. 294.

(2) If A does not know that Z is suffering from such a

disease, then he is not guilty of murder.

Cases to which the second limb of s. 294 is applicable are quite rare

and the instance which does sometimes occur is that in which a

person having an enlarged spleen dies in consequence of a blow

which would not ordinarily result in the death of a healthy person.

Such an instance is not covered by the third limb of s. 294 because

the blow is not sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause

death. Nevertheless, the actual knowledge possessed by the giver of

the blow that it is likely to cause the death of the particular person

attacked converts a case, which otherwise would be only culpable

homicide, into one of murder."

Thus, in the instant appeal, if the prosecution were to succeed in sustaining

the conviction for murder, then it must satisfy this Court that there was evidence

that the Appellant had knowledge of the Ischemic Heart Decease of the deceased

9

and he knew that the sustained assault on the deceased" ... is likely to cause the

death of the particular person attacked".

When the body of evidence presented by the prosecution is examined

carefully it revealed that there was no evidence that the Appellant knew that the

deceased had an underlying heart illness, which is likely to accelerate his death if

the assault is continued. Although there is evidence that the deceased pleaded

with the officers that he had no weapon, there was no mention of any illness.

When the deceased met his lawyer, he did not complain of any heart condition.

Witness Mansi! said he asked the Appellant to allow the deceased to be treated at

a Hospital seeing the assault and if not he would die, but did not disclose that his

brother-in-law had a heart condition.

Witness Mohammed Uniaisis the brother of the deceased's wife and

witnessed the arrest of his brother-in-law by Police. The witness lived with the

deceased and his wife. During examination in chief the witness stated that the

deceased had no illness prior to his arrest and after few days he learnt that the

deceased had died in hospital.

It appears that not only his close relatives, but the deceased himself, was

not aware as to his pre-existing heart condition at the time of the assault.

The evidence of the Appellant's personal involvement in the assault of the

deceased is limited to the witnesses, who saw the deceased for a brief period

10

during his detention. The injury Nos. 30, 31 and 32 could well be inflicted by the

Appellant as there is clear evidence that he used a club to hit the back side of the

deceased. None of these three injuries are fatal or sufficient in the ordinary course

of nature to cause death. No evidence to conclude that he only inflicted injuries

on the deceased.

The evidence clearly indicate that the physical condition of the deceased

had deteriorated with each passing day during his detention. At the time of

arrest, the deceased had no visible bodily ailment or discomfort. When he was

taken out to recover the pistol after few days in detention, he could not even sit

on the seat of the vehicle. When admitted to Hospital for the second time he was

dying. This deterioration of the health of the deceased was obvious. The

Appellant, being the Officer-in-Charge of SIU, who had control over the deceased

in detention, during which there had been a sustained assault on the deceased by

his officers and himself, ought to know that "it is likely by such act to cause death".

It is thus clear that the evidence clearly points out that the Appellant has

committed culpable homicide not amounting to murder since the underlying

heart condition is not known to the Appellant for the offence he committed to be

upgraded to murder.

It appears that this particular aspect had escaped the attention of the trial

Court in consideration of the prosecution case and in convicting the Appellant

for the offence of murder.

11

Therefore, the conviction of murder entered by the trial Court could not be

sustained and had to be set aside with the sentence of death. The conviction and

sentence imposed by the trial Court is accordingly set aside.

This Court alters the conviction of the Appellant for murder to a conviction

for the offence of culpable homicide. On account of his complicity in the assault

and in the death of the deceased, he is imposed a five-year term of imprisonment

and a fine of Rs. 5000.00 with two-year term of imprisonment in default which

will run consecutive to the five-year term.

The appeal of the Appellant is accordingly partly allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

DEVIKA ABEYRATNE, I. I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

12