==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under Section 331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

Kumaragama Palis Mudiyanselage Sanath Dayawansa ailas Shantha

Accused-Appellant CA/HCC/146/2025 Vs. High Court of Puttalam Case No. HC 52/2019

The Hon. Attorney General Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12.

Respondent

Before: Amal Ranaraja, J.

Dr. Sumudu Premachandra, J.

Counsel: Ershan Ariaratnam for the Accused-Appellant

Wasantha Perera, D.S.G. for the State

Argued on: 25.06.2026 Judgment on: 09.07.2026

2

Judgment

Amal Ranaraja. J,

1. The accused-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the ‘appellant’) has been

indicted in the High Court of Puttalam in Case No HC-52-19. The charge

in the indictment is as follows;

01. On or around the 07th of February, 2011, within the

jurisdiction of this Court, in Gamudawa, you have committed

rape against one, Pulhiri Henyalage Nimali Pushpakumari, a

minor under 18 years of age, breaching section 364(2)(e) of the

Penal Code of Sri Lanka; thereby you have committed an

offence, punishable under Section 364(2) of the Penal Code as

amended by Penal Code (Amendment) Act No. 22 of 1995.

2. At the conclusion of the trial, the appellant has been convicted of the

charge and sentenced as follows;

i. A term of 12 years rigorous imprisonment has been imposed on

the appellant. Also fined Rs.10,000.00 with a term of 6 months

simple imprisonment in default.

ii. The appellant has also been directed to pay a sum of Rs.

200,000.00 as compensation to PW01 with a term of 1-year

simple imprisonment in default.

3. The appellant aggrieved by the conviction, disputed judgement and the

sentencing order has preferred the instant appeal to this Court.

3

Case of the Prosecution

4. PW02 is the wife of PW01’s brother. The appellant is PW02’s brother. On

the day of the incident PW01, PW02, and the appellant have travelled to

Anamaduwa, to obtain medicine for PW02’s child. PW02 has not joined

the return trip. She has asked PW01 to go home and advised her on where

to alight from the bus. Apparently, the appellant has also been on the bus

that PW01 took to go home. Midway through the journey, the appellant

has tricked PW01 into alighting from the bus, taken her to a jungle area,

and committed rape.

5. Following the “first complaint”, an investigation has commenced. PW01

has been presented for a medical examination, which has been conducted

by Dr. D.K. Wijewardhana, consultant Judicial Medical Officer. The

resulting medico-legal report has been produced as evidence, marked පැ01.

Case of the Appellant

6. The appellant has maintained that he has no involvement in the incident

referred to in the charge, and that he was employed in Colombo when he

was arrested by the police.

Ground of Appeal

7. When the matter was taken up for argument, the learned counsel

appearing on behalf of the appellant urged the following ground of appeal;

I. The learned High Court Judge has failed to consider the credibility

and probability of PW01.

8. The appellant, by drawing the Court’s attention to the testimony at pages

146 and 170 of the briefs, contends that the appellant has not boarded

4

the bus on which PW01 travelled home, and therefore, has argued that

the incident described by PW01 was improbable.

9. A proper reading of the evidence does not support that contention. The

testimony shows that PW01, PW02, and the appellant, have travelled to

the location where PW01 later boarded the bus. PW02 has remained at

the location until PW01 boarded. The testimony further indicates that, at

about that time, the appellant had gone into a nearby shop. Upon PW01

boarding the bus, PW02 has moved away from the area.

10. Importantly, PW02 has not been concerned with, and has not accounted

for, the appellant’s whereabouts at that point. There is also no evidence

that the appellant accompanied PW02 to wherever she proceeded after

leaving the location.

11. In those circumstances PW02’s evidence cannot reasonably be taken as

excluding the possibility that the appellant subsequently left the shop and

boarded the same bus as PW01. PW02 has simply not been in a position

to state whether the appellant did or did not board the bus after she left

the area. Accordingly, the appellant’s argument, premised on the assertion

that the appellant could not have been on the bus with PW01, rests on

speculation rather than proven fact and it lacks merit.

12. The appellant has also contended that though PW01 has testified that she

had bled after the incident involving the appellant, the doctor who

conducted the medical examination on PW01 has not observed any injury

to her hymen to corroborate this position.

13. Bleeding after intercourse, known medically as postcoital bleeding, may

arise from various issues. They include among others,

i. Vaginal dryness or friction

ii. Cervical inflammation – The narrow tube-like end of the

uterus (the cervix) can become irritated and highly sensitive,

leading it to bleed when touched.

5

iii. Cervical ectropion also known as cervical eversion - This

occurs when delicate cells that line the inside of the cervical

canal spread to the outside surface of the cervix. These cells

are fragile and prone to bleeding upon contact.

iv. Cervical polyps – These are small growths that form on the

cervix or inside the uterus as they are rich in blood vessels,

they can easily rapture or tear during physical impact of sex.

Therefore, the absence of injury to the hymen cannot exclude the

possibility of PW01 bleeding after the incident.

14. Further, it is crucial to acknowledge that psychological states, including

anxiety, fear, and distress, can impact sexual arousal and response.

Distress typically triggers the body’s fight response, which can inhibit

sexual arousal. However, the body’s responses to psychological states can

be complex. In certain instances, individuals may experience physiological

reactions associated with sexual arousal, including lubrication, despite

being in a state of distress.

15. This paradox arises from the body’s capacity to experience conflicting

signals. While distress may inhibit conscious arousal, it does not entirely

preclude physiological responses. The presence of lubrication under such

circumstances cannot be interpreted as consent or readiness for sexual

activity, rather it reflects the intricate nature of human physiology or how

the various systems of the human body work individually or together.

16. Consent must be affirmative, informed and freely given. It would be

dangerous to infer the same, from physiological responses. Therefore,

while lubrication may occur during distress, it does not equate to

individual’s willingness or desire to engage in sexual activity.

17. PW01 describing the incident involving the appellant to Dr. Wijewardhana

has stated thus;

6

Pages 604 & 605 of the Brief

18. PW01 has therefore, been consistent in her narrative from the outset. Her

version of events has remained substantially the same in all material

respects and there are no significant contradictions on the core facts.

19. Importantly, she has disclosed the incident promptly to a civilian and

thereafter, reported the matter to the law enforcement authorities without

undue delay. This sequence of prompt disclosure and reporting supports

the reliability of her account, as it suggests she has acted

contemporaneously, and before any opportunity for coaching or

reconstruction.

20. In those circumstances, I am not inclined to interfere with the conviction,

disputed judgement and sentencing order. I proceed to affirm the same.

7

21. However, I make no order regarding costs.

Appeal dismissed.

22. The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this Judgement to the High

Court in Puttalam for compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Dr. Sumudu Premachandra, J.

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal