IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Court of Appeal

Ca~e No. 253/2015

High Court of Chilaw Case No. 144-2004

In the matter of an appeal under and in terms of Section 331 of the Criminal Procedure Code Act No. 15 of 1979.

The Attorney General of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Complainant

Vs,

Gopalan Sampanarayan Jeyaraj alias Raju. Accused And Now Between

Gopal~m Sampanarayan Jeyaraj alias Raju

Accused-Appellant

Vs, .

The Attorney General of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Complainant-Respondent Before : S. Thurairaja PC, J &

Counsel

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J

: Indika Mallawarachchi Attorney-at-Law for the Accused-Appellant M.Thennakoon SSC for the Complainant-Respondent

Written Submissions : Accused Appellant - 13th November 2017

Respondent - 28th February 2018 Argument on Judgment on

CA 253/2015

: 30th July 2018 and 9th August 2018 : 31 st August 2018

***********

JUDGMENT Page 1 of 6

Judgment

s. Thurairaja, PC. J

Accused appellant (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the appellant) was indicted

by the Attorney General for committing double murder of Rajapakse Mudiyanselage

Milton Nishantha and Rajapakse Mudiyanselage Sanath Priyantha. After the trial at

the High Court of Chilaw the Appellant was found guilty on both counts and

sentenced to death.

Being aggrieved with the said conviction and the sentence the Appellant preferred

the following grounds of appeal.

I. Deposition of PW/6 has been admitted in total contravention of Section 33 of

the Evidence Ordinance and well settled law thereby rendering the deposition

inadmissible.

II. Following closely on the heels of ground 1, Learned Trial Judge seriously

flawed by relying upon the said deposition to form the basis of the conviction.

III. In the event the deposition is jettisoned, conviction is factually untenable due

to paucity of evidence.

IV. Learned Trial Judge failed to address his judicial mind to the items of evidence

favourable to the Appellant thereby denying him of a fair trial.

The Counsel for the Appellant emphasized the fact that the ground of appeal namely

the evidence given at the non-summary inquiry was adopted by the High Court

Judge at the trial which is contradictory to provisions set out by the Evidence

Ordinance.

The Senior State Counsel supported the conviction and submits that there is no

violation of provisions of the Evidence Ordinance.

CA253/2015 JUDGMENT Page 2 of6

, -If // .//

I

The prosecution led the evidence of Siriwardhane Mudiyanselage Bandula

Siriwardhane, JMO Serasinghe Jayakodi Arachchige Piyasena, Chief Inspector of

Police Ranbandage Anura Kumara Premaratne, Sub Inspector of Police Jayasinghe

Mudiyanselage Susantha Jayanath, Sub Inspector of Police Herath Hitihamilage Upali

Ranjith, Sergent of Police Wanshapperuma Kulathilaka Arthanayake Mudiyanselage

Lionel Kumarasiri.

According to the evidence before the High Court is that all of them belong to one

political party. On the day of the incident both deceased were shot by a person who

travelled in a motor-bike on the street. There is only one eye-witness to the incident.

According to him a motor-bike passed him .near the junction. He had observed that

the rider and the pillion rider disembarked from the bike, pulled out a pistol from his

pocket of the jacket and shot at deceased persons. Before shooting he had lifted the

wiser of the helmet, there the witness had identified him as "Raju" who is known to

him m9re than twelve years.

The Appellant was arrested almost two years from after the incident; he had a pistol

and a grenade in his possession. The Appellant was indicted separately for

possession of hand grenade. .

When the present case was taken up before the High Court, the eye-witness died

and his evidence was led under Section 33 of the Evidence Ordinance.

Section 33 of the Evidence Ordinance reads as follows.

"Evidence given by a witness in a judicial proceeding, or before any person

authorized by law to take it, is relevant, for the purpose of proving, in a

subsequent judicial proceeding, or in a later stage of the same judicial

CA253/2015 JUDGMENT Page 3 of6

"1/."::::' './ , ..

I proceeding, the truth of the facts which it states, when the witness is dead or

cannot be found, or is incapable of giving evidence, or is kept out of the way by

the adverse party, or if his presence cannot be obtained without an amount or

delay or expense which, under the circumstances of the case, the court considers

unreasonable:

(a) That the proceeding was between the same parties or their representatives in

interest

(b) That the adverse party in the first proceeding had the right and opportunity

to cross-examine;

(c) That the questions in issue were substantially the same in the first as in the

second proceeding.

In the present case the interpreter of the High Court had got into the box and read

the evidence given by the eye-witness at the non-summary inquiry and the

document was not marked at the trial before the High Court.

Section 62 of the Evidence Ordinance states as follows;

"Primary evidence means the document itself produced for the inspection of the

Court."

It is evidence before the Court; the prosecuting counsel had informed the Court that

he will be filing the certified copies at the trial. There is no material before the Court

to that fact that the State Counsel had submitted the said documents to the Court.

The Police investigation notes, non-summary briefs and other materials including bail

were before the Trial Judge but the Trial Judge cannot consider all materials for his

judgements. The Judge is expected to consider what is presented before him as

evidence, and diminer deportment of the witness. Therefore in technical term the

evidence of the alleged eye-witness which was given at the non-summary inquiry

was not formally produced to the Trial Judge for consideration.

CA2S3/201S JUDGMENT Page 4 of6

In Stephen and three others v. Republic of Queen [66 NLR 264] held that,

"In a trial upon an indictment, the deposition made by a witness at the

non-summary inquiry is not admissible in evidence after his death unless

the original record of the non-summary proceedings is duly produced in

evidence together with a certified copy of the deposition."

This case was followed by H.N.J. Perera J in Rupersinghe Arachchige Upali

Rupersinghe v. The Attorney General leA 204/2012].

Considering the facts of this case the sole eye-witness, Handunneththi

Pathirannaehelage Vipul Priyadharshana is ,dead. His evidence was led at the non-

summary inquiry and submitted to the High Court under Section 33 of the Evidence

Ordinance.

The Learned State Counsel submits that the original case record was before the

Court and the contention of the statement was read and embedded into the

proceedings. Therefore there is no irregularity and hence he is supporting the

conviction.

Considering the technical objections taken I'am of the view that contents of a

document unless otherwise provided cannot be elicited without marking the said

document. I agree with the Sansoni J's findings' in Stephens' Case. Therefore I uphold

the conviction and find there is no proper adoption of the evidence of Vipul

Priyadharshana. In fairness to the prosecution arid the Appellant a re-trial should be

ordered.

After careful consideration of the objections I vacate the conviction and the sentence

and I order are-trial.

CA253/2015 JUDGMENT Page 5 of6

Smce the alleged date of offence is 1999, I order the High Court Judge of Chilaw to

give priority in listing this case for trial and to conclude as soon as possible.

Re-trial ordered.

A.l. Shiran Gooneratne, J

I agree,

CA253/2015

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGMENT Page 6 of6