IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1. M.H.M. Nilam,

Nilam Stores,

No. 94/23,

Panithiyanawatte,

Denipitiya,

Weligama.

2. Dharmasiri Nandalal Daluwate,

No.2, Government Quarters,

Polwatumodara Mirissa,

And other

Battalagewatte,

Polwatumodara Mirissa

Respondent-Petitioners

CA Case No: CA/RI/22/2018

DC Colombo Case No: DSP/22/2017

Vs.

Amana Bank PLC.,

No. 480, Galle Road,

Colombo 3.

Presently at

No. 486,

Galle Road,

Colombo 3.

Petitioner-Respondent

2

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: S. Kumarasingham for the Petitioners.

Palitha Kumarasinghe, P.C., with Asanka

Ranwala for the Respondent Bank.

Supported &

Decided on: 19.11.2018

Samayawardhena, J.

The Petitioner has filed this application for revision and restitutio

in integrum dated 02.11.2018 seeking to set aside the order nisi

dated 02.06.2017 and order absolute dated 21.08.2018 entered

by the learned Additional District Judge of Colombo in case No.

DSP/22/2017 upon an application made by the Respondent

Bank under section 16 of the Recovery of Loans by Banks

(Special Provisions) Act, No. 4 of 1990, as amended (hereinafter

the Act), to obtain an order for delivery of possession of the

property which is described in the Certificate of Sale.

The factual matrix of the case, albeit briefly, is as follows: The

Petitioner has obtained banking facilities from the Respondent

Bank and admittedly defaulted payment as agreed. Thereafter,

the Bank has taken steps under the provisions of the Act to

adopt a Resolution and to recover the dues by parate execution

of the mortgaged property given as security to obtain the loan.

The Petitioner has then filed a case before the Commercial High

Court against that move, and later a settlement has been

entered before the said Court. According to that settlement

3

signed by both parties and their registered Attorneys, the

Petitioner and the Respondent Bank have agreed to the

following:

(a) The plaintiff (Petitioner) concedes that the defendant

Bank is entitled to adopt the Resolution referred to in the

plaint.

(b) The plaintiff will pay a sum of Rs. 25,322,158/= due as

at 24.02.2016 as a full and final payment to settle the

loan before 30.06.2016 together with profits accrued

up to the date of payment, in which event, the

Mortgage Bond will be discharged.

(c) If the plaintiff fails to pay the said sum as agreed, the

defendant Bank is entitled to proceed with parate

execution and auction the property mortgaged and the

plaintiff undertakes that the plaintiff will not commence

any legal proceedings in court to prevent the auction in

any way or manner.

(d) In the event the auction is held, the plaintiff agrees to

deliver vacant possession of the mortgaged property to

the defendant Bank.

The Petitioner has not honoured that undertaking, and later

filed a Revision Application (SC Revision No. 9/2016) before the

Supreme Court challenging the Resolution adopted by the Bank

on the basis that, according to the Loan Agreement, the loan has

been given upon the principles of Islamic Sharia Banking, which

prohibits interest being recovered; but the recovery of the

4

interest component to the principal sum shall be an integral part

of the Resolution to be adopted under the Act, in other words, a

Board Resolution would not be valid without an interest element

claimed along with the unpaid portion of the principal sum

borrowed. The Petitioner further says that, the Bank, whilst

lending money under the Sharia Banking principals,

unscrupulously charges interest indirectly using terms such as,

profit, markup, pricing etc., and therefore, the Loan Agreement

is unenforceable in law as it is tainted with immorality. Hence

the Petitioner has moved to set aside the settlement entered

before the Commercial High Court by exercising the revisionary

jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.

The Supreme Court by order dated 23.01.2017 has dismissed

that application in limine on the basis that a party cannot

directly come before the Supreme Court by way of a revision

application against an order made by the Commercial High

Court.

Thereafter, the Petitioner has filed a revision application before

this Court (CA (PHC) APN 35/2017) seeking the same relief

sought before the Supreme Court, but this Court has dismissed

that application by Judgment dated 28.03.2017.

The Petitioner has then gone before the Supreme Court

canvassing that Judgment, but the Supreme Court has

dismissed that application as well.

In the meantime, the Petitioner has also filed a final appeal

against the order absolute made by the District Court.

5

When facts remained as such, parate auction has been held and

the Certificate of Sale has been issued in the name of the Bank.

Section 15(1) and (2) of the Act read as follows:

15(1) If the mortgaged property is sold, the Board shall

issue a certificate of sale and thereupon all the right, title,

and interest of the borrower to, and in, the property shall

vest in the purchaser; and thereafter it shall not be

competent for any person claiming through or under any

disposition whatsoever of the right, title or interest of the

borrower to, and in, the property made or registered

subsequent to the date of the mortgage of the property to

the bank, in any court to move or invalidate the sale for any

cause whatsoever, or to maintain any right title or interest

to, or in, the property as against the purchaser.

(2) A certificate signed by the Board under subsection

(1) shall be conclusive proof with respect to the sale of any

property, that all the provisions of this Act relating to the

sale of that property have been complied with.

The conclusiveness of the Certificate of Sale has been

emphasized in a long line of decisions. Vide for example the two

separate Judgments of the Supreme Court by Justices Mark

Fernando and Edussuriya in Haji Omar v. Wickramasinghe

[2002] 1 Sri LR 105, Supreme Court Judgment of Justice

Tilakawardane in Amaradasa Liyanage v. Sampath Bank [2015]

BLR 63, Supreme Court Judgment of Justice Anil Gooneratne in

HNB v. Thejasiri Gunethilake in SC Appeal No.189/2012

delivered on 23.11.2016.

6

Section 16 deals with recovery of possession of the (mortgaged)

property in respect of which Certificate of Sale is issued. Section

16(1) of the Act treads as follows:

The purchaser of any immovable property sold in

pursuance of the preceding provisions of this Act shall,

upon application made to the District Court of Colombo or

the District Court having jurisdiction over the place where

that property is situate, and upon production of the

certificate of sale issued in respect of that property under

section 15, be entitled to obtain an order for delivery of

possession of the that property.

It must be made clear that at the time the application for

delivery of possession under section 16(1) is made, there is no

room to contest the initial Resolution passed. That is exactly

what the Petitioner in the instant application is attempting to

do. How can the Resolution, which is the first step of parate

execution be challenged, when the law prohibits even

challenging the Certificate of Sale issued after the public

auction?

It is clear that the plaintiff is abusing the process of Court from

moving one Court to another to prevent the Bank from

recovering the dues by invoking the provisions of the Recovery of

Loans by Banks (Special Provisions) Act, which was introduced

to fast track recovery of loans granted by Banks.

The argument of the learned counsel for the Petitioner that a

Board Resolution would not be valid without an interest element

claimed along with the unpaid portion of the principal sum

7

borrowed is devoid of merit. If that argument is to be accepted,

the Banks will not be able to recover only the principal amount

(without interest) under the provisions of the Act. It is a

misleading statement to say that section 4 of the Act refers to

the recovery of the whole of the unpaid portion of a loan and the

interest due thereon. There is no specific reference to interest

in section 4. It says the unpaid portion of such loan together

with the money and costs recoverable under section 13.

In any event, once the Petitioner gives an undertaking in writing

signed by him and his Attorney on record, that he would not

challenge the Resolution and prevent the auction and deliver

vacant possession in the event the auction is held due to his

failure to pay the amount during the extended time given, he

cannot, after the lapse of the grace period, file cases, one after

the other, challenging the Resolution.

This is a revision and restitutio in integrum application, which is

a discretionary remedy where the conduct of the party applying

for the relief is intensely relevant.

If he thought that Resolution is bad in law due to the application

of Sharia Law, he should have taken up that position when he

first filed the Commercial High Court case (No. 2/2016/M)

challenging the Resolution.

I do not accept that Sharia Law principals are applicable in this

transaction and therefore the provisions of the Recovery of

Loans by Banks (Special Provisions) Act is inapplicable into this

Loan Agreement. Assuming it is correct, as Chief Justice

8

Sansoni stated in Cassim v. Government Agent, Batticaloa1

There must be finality in litigation, even if incorrect orders have

to go unreversed.

I must also emphasize that parties cannot present their cases or

take up defences before the Court of Law in piecemeal. If that is

allowed, there will not be an end to litigation.

Section 34(1) and (2) of the Civil Procedure Code reads thus:

1) Every action shall include the whole of the claim which the

plaintiff is entitled to make in respect of the cause of action;

but a plaintiff may relinquish any portion of his claim in

order to bring the action within the jurisdiction of any court.

2) If a plaintiff omits to sue in respect of, or intentionally

relinquishes any portion of, his claim, he shall not

afterwards sue in respect of the portion so omitted or

relinquished. A person entitled to more than one remedy in

respect of the same cause of action may sue for all or any of

his remedies; but if he omits (except with the leave of the

court obtained before the hearing) to sue for any of such

remedies, he shall not afterwards sue for the remedy so

omitted.

The doctrine of res judicata applies to all matters which existed

at the time of giving the judgment and the party had an

opportunity of bringing before Court.

1 (1966) 69 NLR 403 at 404

9

In Banda vs. Karohamy2, Justice Nagalingam (with Chief Justice

Howard agreeing) stated:

I am inclined to think that the doctrine of res judicata

applies to all matters which existed at the time of the giving

of the judgment and which the party had an opportunity of

bringing before the Court. In this case it is quite obvious

that the present plaintiff had the fullest opportunity of

bringing before the Court his claim of title to the land based

upon the conveyance (P1), for at the date he filed answer

the title conveyed by P1 had vested in him and there was

nothing to prevent him from pleading that title as well. The

present plaintiff not having done so and not having

obtained an adjudication upon that title in the former suit,

the decree in that suit must therefore be deemed to operate

as res judicata in regard to the present assertion of his

claim. For these reasons I hold the judgment of the learned

District Judge is right. The appeal therefore fails and is

dismissed with costs.

Similar conclusions were reached in Jane Nona v. Mohamadu3,

Sinniah v. Eliakutty4.

The doctrine of res judicata, as Justice Bandaranayake (later

Chief Justice) in Stassen Exports Ltd v. Lipton Ltd5 expressed,

has found justification in two fundamental principles: The first

principle, which is public in nature, is based on the maxim interest

2 (1948) 50 NLR 369 at 373 3 (1932) 1 CLW 158 per MacDonell CJ 4 (1932) 1 CLW 253 at 254 per Jayawardene AJ 5 [2009] 2 Sri LR 172 at 185

10

rei publicae ut sit finis litium (in the interest of the state that there

be an end to litigation) and secondly on the footing of a maxim,

private in nature, namely, nemo debet bis vexari pro un at eadem

causa (that no person should be proceeded against twice for the

same cause).

I unhesitatingly dismiss the application of the Petitioner with

costs. Issuance of formal Notice on the Respondent Bank is

refused.

Judge of the Court of Appeal