j ----n --11 IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

c.A. Case No.73412000 (F)

D.C. Kurunegala Case No.33ll!L

Basnayake Mudiyanselage Kirimudiyanse (Deceased)

No.83, KebeJla,

Kolaniya, Pilogama.

PLAINTIFF

Basnayaka Mudiyanselage Gnanawathi Basnayaka Menike

ofWariyapola Road, Kalugamuwa.

Substituted-PLAINTIFF

-Vs-

1. Anulawathi Menike Yatigammana alias Anulwathi Jinanandha

of Negambo Road, Kalugamuwa.

2. M.M. Wickramasinghe (Deceased)

of Negambo Road, Kalugamuwa.

DEFENDANTS

2A. D.M. Kumarihamy

of Negambo Road, Kalugamuwa,

Substituted 2A DEFENDANT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Basnayaka Mudiyanselage Basnayaka Menike

1

Gnanawathi

I

BEFORE

ofWariyapola Road, Kalugamuwa.

Substituted-PLAINTIFF-APPELlANT

-Vs-

1. Anulawathi Menike Yatigammana alias Anulwathi Jinanandha

of Negambo Road, Kalugamuwa.

2A. D.M. Kumarihamy (Deceased)

of Negambo Road, Kalugamuwa.

DEFENDANT -RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Basnayaka Mudiyanselage Basnayaka Menike

Gnanawathi

ofWariyapola Road, Kalugamuwa.

Substituted-PLAINTIFF-APPELLANT

-Vs-

1. Anulawathi Menike Yatigammana alias Anulwathi Jinanandha

of Negambo Road, Kalugamuwa.

2B. D.M. Kumarihamy

of Negambo Road, Kalugamuwa.

Substituted-Substituted-DEFENDANT-RESPONDENT

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,j.

2

J

COUNSEL

Decided on

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

M.I.M. Naleem for the Plaintiff-Appellant

Amrith Rajapakse for the Defendant-Respondent

25.06.2019

T

he Plaintiff-Appellant (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "the Plaintiff)

instituted this action seeking to vindicate his title to a land called "Gammeddawatta"

morefully described in the schedule to the amended plaint and to eject the Defendants

from the land, along with the remedy of damages. The Defendants filed a joint answer

followed by an amended answer wherein they took the stance that they be declared

entitled to the land and sought a dismissal of the action.

So it was a rei vindicatio action filed by the Plaintiff based on prescriptive possession and

as I stated in CA 938/1999 (F) CA minutes of 07.08.2018.

"As is axiomatic, a rei vindicatio action presupposes that at the time of filing action the

Defendant is in unlawful possession and the Plaintiff seeks to vindicate his title and have

the Defendant ejected from the subject-matter which is depicted in the schedule to the

plaint. In Morais v. Victoria (1968) 73 N.L.R 409 de Kretser, J. said: "the right to

possess" (which is one of the rights subsumed in the conception of ownership) "implies

the right to vindicate-i.e., to recover possession from a person who possesses without

title to possess derived from the owner. It will thus be seen that the cause of action in a

rei vindicatio action is the trespass which has resulted in the Plaintiff being kept out of

property of which he is the owner, and which may have caused him consequential loss-

see page 417 (supra). The latter element, namely consequential loss, does not constitute an

indispensable requisite of the rei vindicatio, but merely renders possible an additional

claim for damages."

But the case presented at the trial by the Plaintiff did not establish the ingredients of a

claim of prescriptive title. In the course of cross-examination, the Plaintiff admitted that

3

the predecessors of the Defendants were the owners of the land. There is express

assertion from the Plaintiff that Ginananda-the husband of the 1st Defendant was the title

holder of the property-see p.l07 for the answer given by the Plaintiff in cross-

examination. He further states that they came on to the land as tenant cultivators. This

shows the subordinate capacity in which the Plaintiff had come into occupation of the

corpus. Ginananda had passed away in 1985 and the action was instituted in 1988.

Another admission as to title of the corpus is found at p.107 of the appeal brief wherein

quite unambiguously the Plaintiff admits the title of the Defendants to the land.

There is another admission I find upon the evidence. At an anterior stage to the litigation

in 1987, there had been an inquiry at the Agrarian Service Centre of Wererambugedara,

Kalugamuwa wherein the 1st Defendant had sought a rectification of agricultural lands

register in relation to a land called "Aarachiya Kumbura" that had belonged to her

husband-Ginananda.

The 1st Defendant had sought to have her name entered as an owner cultivator of this land

since her husband passed away. The Plaintiff-Kirimudiyanse giving evidence before the

corrunittee that inquired into the matter, stated that he had handed over Aarachiya

Kumbura upon a promise made by the Defendants that the subject-matter of this action

would be handed over to him. This shows that the Defendants had title to the property.

On petusal of the totality of evidence, I take the view that the learned Judge of Pal1adura

in his judgment dated 01.09.2000 came to the right decision and I affirm the judgment

and dismiss the appeal

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

4