1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979.

Court of Appeal No:

CA/HCC/304-306/2017

High Court of Kurunegala

Case No: HC/072/2012

1. Masakkarahettilage Don

Ishantha Kumara Masakkara

alias Kotiya

2. Aththaragama Bogahapawure

Vidnadurayalage Raveendra

Kumara

3. Rajamuni Dewage Udaya Kumari

Rajamuni

ACCUSED-APPELLANTS

vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

2 | P a g e

BEFORE : Sampath B.Abayakoon, J.

P. Kumararatnam, J,

COUNSEL : Tenny Fernando for the 1st Appellant.

Nihara Randeniya for the 2nd Accused-

Appellant.

Anil Silva, P.C. with Nandana Perera for

the 3rd Accused-Appellant.

Madawa Tennakoon DSG for the

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 10/02/2022

DECIDED ON : 24/03/2022

************************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellants (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellants) were indicted jointly in the High Court of Kurunegala under

Section 296 read with Section 32 of the Penal Code for committing the

murder of Agangangoda Acharige Dharmaratna on or about 22nd September

2006.

The trial commenced before the High Court Judge as the Appellants had

opted for a non-jury trial. After the conclusion of the prosecution case, the

3 | P a g e

learned High Court Judge had called for the defence and the Appellants had

made dock statements. After considering the evidence presented by both

parties, the learned High Court Judge had convicted the Appellants under

section 296 of the Penal code and sentenced them to death on 25/07/2017.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellants

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellants informed this court that the

Appellants have given consent to argue this matter in their absence due to

the Covid 19 pandemic. Also, at the time of argument the Appellants were

connected via Zoom from prison.

Counsels appearing for the Appellants have submitted their appeal grounds

separately.

Grounds of appeal advanced by the 1st Appellant are as follows:

1. Learned High Court Judge has misdirected herself causing a failure

to assess the legality of the recovery made under Section 27(1) of the

Evidence Ordinance.

2. The prosecution has failed to establish beyond reasonable doubt the

nexus between the alleged recovery of the weapon and the injuries on

the deceased by providing admissible evidence namely failing to call

the JMO to establish injuries on the deceased and cause of injury.

3. The prosecution has failed to establish the date and the time of death

beyond reasonable grounds.

4. The Learned High Court Judge has misdirected herself causing a

failure to apply the principle related to circumstantial evidence and

thereby the conviction is not safe.

4 | P a g e

The counsels for the 2nd and the 3rd Appellants filing one ground of appeal

contend that using the confession of 1st Appellant against the 2nd and 3rd

Appellants is inadmissible and their convictions are illegal and bad in law.

Background of the Case

On the 15th of September 2006 around 9.30 p.m., PW04 Asanka while

driving his three-wheeler was stopped by his friend - the first Appellant, close

to the deceaseds house requesting a lift. This witness had noticed an odor

of liquor emanating from the 1st Appellant at the time. After getting into the

three-wheeler the 1st Appellant had told the witness that searching for the

deceased was a futile exercise as he with 2nd and 3rd Appellants had killed

the deceased and dumped his body into a well situated close to the

deceaseds house. The deceased has been missing 2-3 days by this time and

the people of the area have been started to looking for him. The 1st Appellant

had stated further that as the deceased had come to assault 1st and 2nd

Appellants, they had killed him by assaulting with a club before dumping

the body into the well. At this time the 3rd Appellant was living in the

deceaseds house and people suspected that she was having an illicit affair

with the deceased as the wife of the deceased had gone abroad during this

period. This witness had divulged this information to PW1 Upul Perera a

Pradeshiya Sabha member, who in return called the Police Emergency Unit

(119) and passed this information to the police.

After receiving this information via 119, PW8 Gunaratna had visited the

scene around 1 a.m. and noticed that the dead body was floating in the well.

Thereafter he had proceeded to arrest the 1st Appellant and he was arrested

at 3.30 a.m. from his house. Upon further inquiry 3rd Appellant was arrested

from deceaseds house at 5 a.m. and the 2nd Appellant was arrested at 5.20

a.m. from the deceaseds house. At that time, he was hiding under a bed.

5 | P a g e

Upon the statement of the 1st Appellant the body of the deceased was fished

out from the well in the presence of the Magistrate. A sarong was wrapped

around neck of the dead body. Injuries have been observed on the neck and

the head. The well is situated 10 meters away from the rear side of the

deceaseds house. Further an iron bar, a sword with blood like stains and a

carpet-like piece of cloth also recovered by the police from a toilet pit situated

close to the well.

During the search conducted in the house of the deceased the police had

observed washed off blood like stains in the house. Further they had noticed

blood like stains on the wall and on the curtains. The bed sheet and the

mattresses were in disorderly manner. Nine meters away from the kitchen

the police had observed burnt remnants of a sleeping mat.

PW3 Janaki a neighbor of the deceased told the court that earlier the

deceased was living in his daughters house but two months prior to his

death he was living in his house with the 3rd Appellant. Also, she had noticed

that that the son of the 3rd Appellant and the daughter of the deceased had

fetched water from her well instead of their own. According to her this was

unusual.

After the close of the prosecution case the defense was called and dock

statements were made by all the defendants and the case was closed for the

defense as well.

The 1st Appellant in his first ground of appeal complains that the Learned

High Court Judge has misdirected herself and failed to assess the legality of

the recovery made under Section 27(1) Evidence Ordinance.

The disappearance of the deceased was revealed by the confession made by

the 1st Appellant to PW4 who had given a lift to the 1st Appellant in his three-

6 | P a g e

wheeler. Although PW4 had not passed this information to the police but he

had promptly divulged the same to PW1 who was a member of the Pradeshiya

Sabha of the area. He immediately passed this information to the police

which prompted the police to recover the dead body. There is no fault on the

part of PW4 for informing PW1 about the confession instead of the police.

Evidence against 1st Appellant further strengthened by the recovery upon his

statement to the police under section 27(1) of the Evidence Ordinance.

According to Section 27(1) of the Evidence Ordinance-

Provided that, when any fact is deposed to as discovered in

consequence of information received from a person accused of any

offence, in the custody of a police officer, so much of such information,

whether it amounts to a confession or not, as relates distinctly to the

fact thereby discovered may be proved.

Upon his statement the well, in which the deceased body was recovered was

discovered by the police. Further a sword and an iron rod were recovered

from a nearby toilet pit. The relevant portion of his statement was marked as

P1(a) in the trial. The prosecution had led evidence of these recoveries under

section 27(1) of the Evidence Ordinance successfully.

During the trial this evidence was not challenged by the defence. Therefore,

this ground has no merit.

In the second ground the 1st Appellant contends that the prosecution has

failed to establish beyond reasonable doubt the nexus between alleged

recovery of weapon and the injuries on the deceased by providing admissible

evidence namely failing to call the JMO to establish the injuries on the

deceased and the cause of those injuries.

7 | P a g e

In this case on 21/06/2017 the defence had admitted the Post Mortem

Report of the deceased under Section 420 of the Code of Criminal Procedure

Act No.15 of 1979. As such the prosecution did not call PW12 who has

performed the post mortem examination of the deceased and filed the report

in the court. At the end of the trial the said Post Mortem Report was marked

as P7 through the court interpreter. Now the 1st Appellant contends that the

prosecution had to call the JMO to establish the nexus between alleged

recovery of weapon and the injuries on the deceaseds body.

In Perera v. Attorney General (1998) 1 SLR 378 the court held:

An admission could be recorded at any stage of the trial, before the

case for the prosecution is closed. The purpose of recording an

admission is to dispense with the burden of proving the fact at the trial

When a document is admitted under Section 420 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 and accepted as evidence the contents of the

document will be considered as evidence in the trial. At the same time the

prosecution will dispense with the burden of proving the fact at the trial.

Accordingly, in this case, the Post Mortem Report also had become evidence.

In the Post Mortem Report four external injuries and corresponding internal

injuries were clearly mentioned by the JMO. Further the JMO had opined

that the death was caused due to head injury caused by blunt and sharp

weapons. Considering the Section 27(1) recovery under Evidence Ordinance,

it is incorrect to say that the prosecution has failed to establish the nexus

between alleged recovery of weapon and the injuries on the deceased. As

such, this ground of appeal too has no merit.

In his third ground of appeal the 1st Appellant argues that the prosecution

has failed to establish the date and the time of death beyond reasonable

grounds.

8 | P a g e

According to witness PW4 Senaratna on 24/09/2006 the 1st Appellant had

confessed that the deceased was dumped in the well. In his evidence he had

further said that the 1st Appellant had told him that the deceased had died

two days prior to his confession to PW4. Hence, as per the confession of the

1st Appellant the date of death of the deceased was 22/09/2006. Not

establishing the time of death of the deceased is not so vital in this case.

The post mortem examination was done on 26/09/2006. The JMO who had

performed the autopsy had stated that the deceaseds body was swollen, eye

was protrude, skin was white and greasy, Epidermis had been lost in most

part of the body. Marbling was also seen. With the changes of the deceaseds

body and the confession of the 1st Appellant the prosecution has established

the date of death of the deceased beyond reasonable grounds. Hence this

ground also has no merit.

In the fourth ground of appeal the Appellant contends that the Learned High

Court Judge has misdirected herself by failing to apply the principle related

to circumstantial evidence and thereby the conviction is not safe.

Learned High Court Judge in her judgment at page 181 of the brief very

clearly analysed the circumstantial evidence available against the Appellants

in this case.

To substantiate her findings against the 1st Appellant she had cited the

judgment of King v. Abeywickrama Et Al 44 NLR 254. In this judgment the

court held that:

In order to base a conviction on circumstantial evidence the Jury must

be satisfied that the evidence was consistent with the guilt of the

accused and inconsistent with any reasonable hypothesis of his

innocence.

9 | P a g e

In the case of Tamil Nadu v Rajendran Appeal (1996) 917(Cr.L) the Indian

Supreme Court observed that:

In a case of circumstantial evidence when an incriminating

circumstance is put to the accused and the said accused either offers no

explanation or offers an explanation which is found to be untrue, then

the same becomes an additional link in the chain of circumstances to

make it complete.

In this case the death of the deceased had surfaced upon the confession to

PW4 by the 1st Appellant. Further investigations had led the police to recover

certain items connected to the death of the deceased upon the statement

made under Section 27(1) of the Evidence Ordinance.

The 1st Appellant in his short dock statement denied the allegation levelled

against him. Though he has not been bound by law to offer any explanation,

he failed to offer an explanation when strong and incriminating evidence had

been led against him.

In the case of Somaratne Rajapakse Others v Hon. Attorney General (S.C.

Appeal) 2/2002 TAB) Justice Bandaranayake observed that:

With all this damning evidence against the Appellants with the

charges including murder and rape the Appellants did not offer any

explanation with regard to any of the matters referred to above.

Although there cannot be a direction that the accused person must

explain each and every circumstance relied on by the prosecution and

the fundamental principle being that no person accused of a crime is

bound to offer any explanation of his conduct there are permissible

limitations in which it would be necessary for a suspect to explain the

circumstances of suspicion which were attached to him.

10 | P a g e

In this case the prosecution had led very strong circumstantial evidence

against the 1st Appellant and it is consistent only with the guilt of the

appellant and is totally inconsistent with his innocence. Hence his final

ground is also devoid any merit.

Now I am going to consider the appeal ground advanced by the counsels for

the 2nd and the 3rd Appellants that using of the confession made by the 1st

Appellant is inadmissible against the 2nd and 3rd Appellants and their

conviction is therefore illegal and bad in law.

At this stage Learned Presidents Counsel who appeared for the 3rd Appellant

had requested the court to allow his submissions be made prior to the

counsel for the 2nd Appellant. Accordingly, the application was allowed.

The Learned Presidents Counsel contended that it is a settled law that the

confession of an accused cannot be taken as an item of evidence against the

other accused in a criminal trial.

In this case as stated above the death of the deceased was came to light upon

the confession made by the 1st Appellant to PW4, who in return conveyed the

same to PW1. Thereafter, PW1 had called the Police Emergency Unit (119)

and the police commenced investigations. Upon the said information the

police arrested the 1st Appellant first and the 2nd and the 3rd Appellants

thereafter. The reason for the prompt arrest of 2nd and 3rd Appellants is the

confession made by the 1st Appellant to the witness PW04.

Section 30 of the Evidence Ordinance reads as follows:

When more persons than one are being tried jointly for the same

offence, and a confession made by one such person affecting himself

and some other of such persons is proved, the court shall not take into

consideration such confession as against such other person.

11 | P a g e

Based on this section of the Evidence Ordinance our superior courts had

delivered several judgments endorsing the Section 30 of the Evidence

Ordinance.

In Vivekanandan v. Selvaratnam 79I NLR 337 the court held that:

Now I come to the third point that an extra judicial confession of an

accused cannot be used in evidence against his co-accused under

Section 30 of the Evidence Ordinance.

In Joseph v. Peris et al 24 NLR 485 De Sampayo J held that:

I am bound to hold that, in view of that provision the confession made

by the second accused to the District Engineer was inadmissible, and

does not furnish any evidence against the first accused.

As per the Section 30 of the Evidence Ordinance and above considered

judicial decisions, it is abundantly clear that the confession made to PW4 by

the 1st Appellant in this case cannot be used to find 3rd Appellant guilty in

this case.

Now I consider whether exclusion of the confessionary evidence against the

3rd Appellant will exonerate her from the murder charge levelled against her.

The prosecution led evidence that the 3rd Appellant was residing with the

deceased at all relevant times and therefore she could be responsible for the

death of the deceased. But there was no admissible evidence led to the effect

that either the 3rd Appellant was present at the crime scene or took part in

committing the murder. The 3rd Appellant being resident in the deceaseds

12 | P a g e

house does not by itself lead to an inference that she was involved in the

commission of the offence unless the prosecution adduces incriminating

evidence against the 3rd Appellant.

Further the police evidence revealed that there were blood-like stains on the

floor of the deceaseds house and on the window curtains. But no any

evidence by an analyst was submitted by the prosecution to confirm this. In

the absence of analysts evidence, no evidentiary value could be given to this

evidence.

In Ranjith v. State [2000] 3 SLR page 346 the court held that:

As regards the evidence relating to the recovery of blood-stained clothes

it appears that these clothes had not been sent to the Government

Analyst for examination and report. Hence, there is no evidential value

to consider that item of evidence as an item of incriminating evidence

against the accused appellant.

When considering the adduced evidence against the 3rd Appellant, I conclude

that is not sufficient to bring a conviction under section 296 of Penal Code

against the 3rd Appellant.

After the conclusion of the submissions made on behalf the 3rd Appellant,

the Learned Deputy Solicitor General appearing for the Respondent, in

keeping with the highest tradition of the Attorney Generals Department

informed this court the he was not going to contest the appeal ground

advanced by the 2nd Appellant. Hence the counsel who appeared for the 2nd

Appellant was released from making submissions on behalf of the 2nd

Appellant.

13 | P a g e

In this case the prosecution had led incriminating circumstantial evidence

against the 1st Appellant and the circumstances established were consistent

with the 1st Appellants guilt and inconsistence with his innocence. Hence, I

proceed to dismiss his appeal.

As the case against the 2nd Appellant was not contested by the Respondent,

his appeal is allowed and he is acquitted from the charge.

As mentioned above, no plausible evidence is led against the 3rd Appellant.

Therefore, her appeal is allowed and she is acquitted from the charge.

The Registrar is directed to send a copy of this judgment to the High Court

of Kurunegala along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL