IN TIlE COURT OF APPEAL OF \THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Revision Application No: CA (PHC)APN 122/2016

H.C. Kandy Case No: HC 132/2006

In the lnatter of an Application for Revision made under Article 138 of the Constitution read with section 364 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Complainant

I Vs.

Urapola Pakshaperuma Arachchilage Gunathileke, No.20, Adanadeniya, Panvilathanna.

AND NOW BETWEEN

The Attorney General

Accused

Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12. Com plainan t-Petitioner

Vs. Urapola Pakshaperuma Arachchilage Gunathileke, No.20, Adanadeniya, Panvilathanna. Accused-Respondent

Page ~,.of 9

/

BEFORE

COl.JNSEL

Al{GlJED ON

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

DECIDED ON

K.K. WICKREMASINGHE, J.

K. K. Wick remasinghe, J ~ Janak De Silva~ J.

Sh8:naka Wijesinghe, DSG for the Cot;nplainant-Petitioner

.A.cC;used-Appel1ant was absent and unrepresented

24.05.2018

The Complainant-Petitioner- On 24.07.2018

3197.2018

This revision application is filed by the !;Ion. Attorney General seeking to revise

, I and set aside the sentence imposed by th~ Learned High Court Judge of Kandy in

the Case No. HC 132/06 dated 14.12.2015.

Facts of the Case:

The Accused-Respondent (hereinafter re~erred to as the Respondent) was indicted

in the High Court of Kandy for committing grave sexual abuse, an offence

punishable under section 365B (2)(b) of the Penal Code as amended by Act No. 22

of 1995 and Act No. 29 of 1998.

1 " Page 2.of"9

On 14. I 2.20 15, the Respondent pleaded guilty to the said charge and the Learned , High Court Judge of Kandy has imposed following sentences on the Respondent;

a) A term of 2 years Rigorous imprisonment suspended for 15 years,

b) A fine of Rs.2500/= with a default tenn of I year Rigorous

imprisonment,

c) A compensation fee of Rs. 75,000/= if default 1 year Rigorous

imprisonment.

Being aggrieved by the said sentence, Hotl. Attorney General (hereinafter referred

to as the Petitioner) preferred a revision application in this court seeking to revise

the said sentence and to substitute lawful appropriate sentence, considering the

facts of the case.

The Learned DSG for the Petitioner submitted that the victim was a girl of 13 years

when she was subjected to grave sexual abuse by the Respondent in year 2003. At

the time of the alleged act, the Respondent was 55 years old and a father of 3

children. In the statement made by the victim to the Police, she has alleged that this

1 act of grave sexual abuse had taken place on numerous occasions and she 'was

offered Rs. 40/= or 50/= following each act.

The Petitioner submitted that the sentence imposed by the Learned High Court

Judge was contrary to law and manifestly inadequate having regard to the nature of

the offence and for following reasons;

i) Section 365B (2)(b) carries a minimum mandatory sentence,

ii) The Learned High Court Judge had not considered the age gap

between the Respondent (Accused) and the Victim,

Page 3 of 9

iii) The Learned High Court Judge had misdirected himself with regard to the ratio depidendi in SC Reference 17/2003 which

was completely differ~nt to the instant case.

In the case of Attorney General v. Ranasinghe & Others (1993) 2 Sri L.R 81, it

was stated as follows;

"In the case of, Keith Billam [(1986) Vol 82 Criminal Appeal Reports 347J

the Lord Chief Justice repeated the.foregoing observations and stated that in

a contested case of rape a jigure ojjive years imprisonment should be taken

as the starting point of the se,:Jtence, subject to any aggravating or

mitigating features. He observed further as follows " The crime should in.

any event be treated as aggravated' by any of the following factors: (1)

violence is used over and above the force necessary to commit the rape; (2)

a weapon is used to frighten or wound the victim; (3) the rape is repeated;

(4) the rape has been carefully planned: (5) the defendant has previous

convictions for rape or other serious offences of a violent or sexual kind; (6)

:1 the victim is subjected to further sexual indignities or perversions; (7) the

victim is either very old or very young; (8) the effect upon the victim,

whether physical or mental, is of special seriousness. Where anyone or

more of these aggravating features are present, the sentence should be

substantially higher than the jigure, suggested as the starting point ... "

In the case of Attorney General v. MEyagodage Sanath Dharmadiri Perera;

[CA (PH C) APN 147/2012], L.T.B. Dehideniya, J, referred to the case of State

of Karnataka v. Krishnappa 2000 A.I.ll. 1470, in the following manner;

Page i:: of 9

"Indian Supreme Court held iJ;i' the case of State of Karnataka v!'

Krishnappa 2000 A.I.R.1470 at page 1475 it was observed that;

We must remember that a rapist not only violates the victim's privacy and

personal integrity, but inevitably;, causes serious psychological as well as

physical harm in the process. Rape is not only merely a physical assault - it

is often destructive of the whole personality of the victim. A murdeter

destroys the physical body of the ,victim; a rapist degrades the very soul oj

the helpless female. The Courts, therefore, shoulder a greater responsibility

, while trying an accused on charg~s of rape. They must deal with such cases

with utmost sensitivity. A socially sensitized judge, in our opinion, is a better

statutory armour in cases of crime against women than long clauses of penal

provisions, containing complex exc,eptions and provisos ... "

In the instant case, there had been no forGe or violence used on the victim. Further

her consent was immaterial under the prevailing law, as she was only 13 years old

at the time of the alleged offence.

As in the case of [CA (PHC) APN 147/2012], it was further held that,

I l "In the instant case there is no violence practiced on the victim, but she is CJ

person unable to give consent under the law. The victim is a girl under 16

years of age and the accused 'is a married person with two children.

Therefore even if there is no violence used on her, Court has to consider that

the accused having a sexual relati@nship with this young girl repeatedly as a ,

I very serious crime which deserves a deterrent punishment, a long term

custodial sentence ... "

Page 5 of9

It is noteworthy that the Respondent had. been previously convicted twice in the

~

I High Court of Kandy for offences of similar nature under Case No. HC 95/2006

and Case No. HC 133/2006.

! ~~ In the case of The Attorney General v.! H.N. de Silva 57 NLR 121, it was held

that,

.i

I "In assessing the punishment that :~hould be passed on an offender, a Judge

should consider the matter of sentence both from the point of view of the

public and the offender. Judges are too often prone to look at the question

only from the angle of the offenJ/er. A Judge should, in determining the

proper sentence, first consider the gravity of the offence as it appears from

the nature of the act itself and should have regard to the punishment

provided in the Penal Code or C:.fhe.r statute under which the offender is

charged. He should also regard the effect of the punishment as a deterrent

and consider to what extent it will be effective.

It was further held that,

H The reformation of the criminal, though no doubt an important

consideration, is subordinate to the others I have mentioned. Where the

public interest or the welfare of the State (which are synonymous) outweighs

the previous good character, ant~cedents and age of the offender, public

interest must prevail ... "

Furthermore, we consider the fact that the Learned High Court Judge of Kandy had

suspended the sentence imposed on the Respondent. Section 303 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 as amended by Act No. 47 of 1999

~ stipulates that;

Page 6 of9

303. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, on sentencing an offender

to a term of imprisonment, a court may make an order suspending the whole

or part of the sentence if it is satisfied, for reasons to be stated in writing,

that it is appropriate to do so in thr circumstances, having regard to -

(a) the maximum penalty prescrib~dfor the offence in respect of which the

sentence is imposed;

L, (b) the nature and gravity of the offence;

(d) the offender's previous character ,.

(h) the need to deter the offender or other persons from committing offences

of the same or of a similar character;

0) the need to protect the victim cJr th,e community from the offender; !

(2) A court shall not make i ~n order suspending a sentence of

imprisonment if-

(a) a mandatory minimum senten"'ce of imprisonment has been prescribed

by law for the offence in respect oj' which the sentence is imposed; or

(b) the offender is serving, or is yet to serve, a term of imprisonment that has

not been suspended; or ...

Accordingly it is understood that section,303(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure,

Act provides for the instances where the sentence shall not be suspended. In the

instant case, the section 365B (2) (b r of the Penal Code, under which the

Respondent was indicted, carries a minim'um mandatory sentence of imprisonment.

Therefore we are of the view that the Le8rned High Court Judge has misdirected'

himself in suspending the above sentence even without stating the reasons In

writing for such suspension.

Page,T of 9

In the judgment of the Supreme Court,SC Reference No.03/2008, it was stated

, , that,

"However, there may well be exceptional cases in which an offence may be

so serious in nature that irrespejitive of the circumstances a Court may

never exercise judicial discretion in favor of a punishment less than an

appropriate minimum mandatory punishment ... a minimum mandatory

; punishment of appropriate severity for such serious offences would not be

inconsistent with Articles 4(c), 11 and 12(1). "

It was held in the case of Attorney General v. Jinak Sri Uluwaduge and another

[1995] 1 Sri L R 157 that;

"In determining the proper sentence the Judge should consider the gravity

of the offence as it appears from the hature of the act itself and should have

l regard to the punishment provided in the Penal Code or other statute under

which the offender is charged. He should also regard the effect of the

punishment as a deterrent and consider to what extent it will be effective ...

" , The Judge must consider the interests of the accused on the one hand and ! the interests of society on the ~(her; also necessarily the nature of the

offence committed ... "

It is pertinent to note that, at the time, of committing the alleged offence, the

minimum mandatory imprisonment prescribed under section 365B (2) (b) of the

Penal Code was 10 years. However, the Amendment Act No.16 of 2006 has

reduced that minimum mandatory sentence to 7 years. Considering the date of

indictment, the punishment applicable to the Respondent was "rigorous

1 imprisonment for a term not less than 10' years and not exceeding 20 years."

Page30f9

Therefore considering the facts of the case and the gravity of the offence, we are of the view that the sentence imposed by the Learned High Court Judge is manifestly

inadequate. Further we find the Learned High Court Judge has misdirected himself

in suspending the sentence when there was a minimum mandatory sentence

prescribed by law.

Accordingly we set aside the imprisonment imposed by the Learned High Court i. Judge and enhance the sentence by imposing 10 years Rigorous imprisonment.

Fine and the compensation imposed on th~e Accused will be the same.

Revision application is hereby allowed.

The Registrar is directed to send a copy of the judgment to the relevant High Court

of Kandy to take immediate steps to appr~hend the Accused-Respondent.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

\

Janak De Silva, J.

I agree,

JuDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Cases referred to:

1) Attorney General v. Ranasinghe & Otners (1993) 2 Sri L.R 81 2) Attorney General v. Mayagodage Sanath Dharmadiri Perera

[CA (PHC) APN 147/2012] 3) The Attorney General v. H.N. de Silva 57 NLR 121 4) SC Reference No.03/2008 5) Attorney General v. Jinak Sri UluwadJge and another [1995] 1 Sri L R 157

Page 9 of9