==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 4

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Court of Appeal Case No:

CA / BAIL/ 058/2022

Magistrate’s Court of Kurunegala

Case No: B / 1720/2022

In the matter of an application

for bail under section 10 (1) (a) of

the Assistance to and Protection

of Victims of Crime Witnesses

Act No. 4 of 2015.

Officer in Charge

Weerambugedara Police Station

Weerambugedara

Complainant

Vs.

Kolamba Arachchige Upul Samantha Perera.

Rajapitiya

Pothuhera

(Presently in Remand)

Suspect

AND NOW BETWEEN

Dingiya Kosgollalage Dilani Susantha Kumari,

Rajapitiya

Mahapitiya

Pothuhera.

Page 2 of 4

(Wife of the Suspect)

Petitioner

Vs.

Officer in Charge

Weerambugedara Police Station

Weerambugedara

Complainant – Respondent

Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department

Colombo 12.

Respondent

Before: Menaka Wijesundera J.

Neil Iddawala J.

Counsel: Lakshan Dias for the Petitioner.

Hansa Abeyratne, SC for the State.

Argued on: 24.01.2023

Decided on: 01.03.2023

MENAKA WIJESUNDERA J.

The instant application has been filed to obtain bail for the suspect

namely Kolamba Arachchige Upul Samantha Perera under the

provisions of Assistance to and Protection of Victims of crimes and

Witnesses act.

Page 3 of 4

The suspect in the instant matter had been arrested and produced for

causing mischief to the house of Derric Gold Pathum Paul on 9.5.2022

and remanded on 15.5 2022 and upon obtaining bail for the same had

threatened the virtual complainant with death and the police had

reported facts under the instant act and he had been remanded by the

Magistrate.

The main Contention of the Counsel for the suspect is the discrepancies

in the evidence against the suspect and the lack of identification.

But the Counsel for the respondents objected to the application and

stated that the suspect should be urging exceptional circumstances to

obtain bail and that he has not done so and stated further that the

indictment against the suspect for the instant matter would be

dispatched soon.

The law pertaining to this matter is that a suspect produced and

remanded under this act can be granted bail only upon exceptional

circumstances by the Court of Appeal, and the term exceptional has not

been defined in the act but our legal literature has held that

exceptionality has to be determined by the facts of each case.

In the instant matter the Counsel for the suspect urged this Court to go

in to the merits of the case which had been permitted in the case of

Queen vs Liyanage and in many others but in a recent judgement by the

Supreme Court, in the case of SC-SPL-LA 53-2022 has held contrary .

While appreciating the legal sentiments discussed in the above

mentioned case we are of the opinion that as the indictment is also being

Page 4 of 4

dispatched in the near future that the grounds urged by the Counsel for

suspect cannot be considered at this juncture.

As such the instant application for bail is hereby dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.

I agree.

Neil Iddawala J.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.