IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. R.I. Case No. 64/2012

D.C. Gampaha Case No. 1800/l

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Written Submissions on:

Argued on

Decided on

Edirisinghe Arachchilage Indrani Chandralatha

No. 09, Housing Scheme,

Kibulgoda,

Yakkala.

DEFENDANT ~ PETITIONER

Elrick Ratnum

No. 308/35/A09, Kibulgoda,

Yakkala.

Presently at

No. 173 lOIS, Charmara Sevana Mawatha,

Miriswaththa,

Mudungoda.

PLAINTIFF~RESPONDENT

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,J.

M.W. Padmaraji for the Defendant~ Petitioner.

Neomal Pelpola with B. Gamage for the Plaintiff~ Respondent.

29.04.2016 (For the Plaintiff~Respondent)

02.05.2016 (For the Defendant~ Petitioner)

11.03.2016

02.08.2017

1

f

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

When this application for restitutio in integrum was taken up for argument, the Defendant~

Petitioner (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "the Petitioner") moved Court that the

application be disposed of by way of written submissions. The Plaintiff~Respondent

(hereinafter sometimes referred to as "the Respondent") however raised a preliminary

objection in regard to the maintainability of the application.

The preliminary objection raised the inadequacy of or failure to fulfill the requirements

necessary to maintain an application for restitutio in integrum.

It was strenuously contended by thE. Counsel for the Respondent Mr. Neomal Pelpola

that having identified the'nature of the application before this Court as "In the matter of

an application for restitutio in integrum", the Petitioner in the prayer to the Petition does not

specify an order or act from which she seeks the remedy of restitution. In order to

understand this contention, it is apposite to set out the reliefs sought by the Petitioner in

the prayer to the petition dated 28.02.2012. The prayer goes as follows:~

"Wherefore the Defmdant~ Petitioner prays that Your Lordships Court be pleased to

a) issue notice of the application to the Plaintiff-Respondent;

b) issue an order staying the proceedings in the District case bearing No. 1800/L pending

hearing and determination of this application;

c) stay execHtionof the writ ordered on 13.02.2012 marked ~ and RJ;

d) in case the Dffendant~Pctitioner is ejected by the PlaintifFRespondent to restore back the

position of the D~fendant -Petitioner with damages ofRs. 2,500,000(;

e) grant costs and such other and further relief as toY our Lordships Court shall seem meet."

Before this Court determines whether the aforesaid prayer lacks specificity or fails to seek

the remedy of restitutio in integrum, the factual background of this application needs

narration. Upon a perusal of the pleadings filed in the case, it becomes apparent that a

settlement was entered into by both the Petitioner anel Respondent in the District Court

2

.

of Gampaha in Case No. 1800/L ~ see a certified copy of the terms of settlement entered

into on 11.03.2011 which have been briefed to this Court marked "I" to the petition. It

appears that the said document marked "I" clearly shows that the terms of settlement

were explained to the Plaintiff (Respondent) and Defendant (Petitioner), who, having

agreed to the said terms, thereafter signed the record. This Court observes that both

parties had been represented by Counsel at the time the terms of settlement were entered

into. Subsequently alleging a breach of the terms of the settlement, the Respondent

moved the District Court and sought a writ against the Defendant-Petitioner.

By an order dated 13.02.2012, the learned District Judge of Gampaha examined the ,) existence or otherwise of the alleged breach and issued a writ of execution in favour of

the Plaintiff-Respondent - vide the order marked as R1 to the petition for restitutio in

integrum. Aggrieved by the issue of writ of execution, the Petitioner states in paragraph 11

of the petition that she invoked the jurisdiction of the Provincial High Court of the

Western Province in both appeal and revision and notice was issued on the Respondent

returnable for 09.03.2012.

This application for restitutio in integmm has been filed in this Court on 2S.02.2012. It is this

application, whose lack of specificity or requirements sufficient to maintain a proper

application for restitutio in integmm, that is being complained of in the preliminary

---. -- --obJection. So in a nutshell let me sum up the dates that I find material in the times lines

of this case.

1) A settlement dated 11.03.2011 in the District Court of Gampaha (Case No. lS00/L);

2) An order of the District Court dated 13.02.2012 confirming the breach of the terms

of settlement and issuing a writ of execution;

3) An appeal and revision filed in Civil Appellate High Court of the Western Province

holden in Gampaha, wherein notice was issued returnable for 09.03.2012; .

4) This application for restitutio in integrum was filed in this Court on 2S.02.2012.

3

- .

)

I

-.------

It has to be noted that if the settlement entered into voluntarily in the District Court on

11.03.2011 is the act or order that the Petitioner seeks to impugn, there is no mention

anywhere in the petition before this Court that the settlement was by trickery and fraud

- grounds that are available to nullify terms of settlement. In other words the antecedent

terms of settlement are not impugned at all in the prayer to the petition before this Court.

If at all, it is only the writ, that was issued consequent to the entering into the terms of

settlement, that is being attacked -before this Court. It ill behoves the Petitioner to

impugn the writ of execution, unless she has succeeded in attacking the terms of

settlement that resulted in the writ. The terms of settlement crystallized into a consent

decree before the learned District Judge. It was the breach of that consent decree that led

to the \\-Tit being issued against the Petitioner. How can this writ be impugned unless the

precedent consent decree is nullified? That deiciencyappears to be the Achilles heel of

the petition before me.

Though the prayer does not seek a nullification of the consent decree, none of the grounds

that are usually relied upon to set aside a consent dec ree have been adverted to by the

Petitioner in the application. The follo\ving precedents setting out the relevant grounds

of nullity to set aside consent decrees have been carefully culled by U.LA. Majeed in his

"A Commentary on Civil Procedure Code and Civil LaliV in Sri Lanka" -(Volume II) at

pp 1619 and 1620. I set dcrwn the following passages from the learned author's work.

GROUNDS FOR RESTITUTION . Any party who is aggrieved by a judgment, decree or order of the District Court or Family

Court may apply for the interference of the Court and relief by way of restitutio in integrum

if good grounds are shown. The just grounds for restitution are fraud, fear, minority etc.

Our Superior Courts have held that the power of the Court to grant relief by way of

restitutio in integrum, in respect of judgments of original Courts, is a matter of grace ~nd

discretion, and such relief may be sought only in the following circumstances:-

4

1

i ( . !

(a) Fraud: where the judgment has been obtained by fraud, relief can be granted~see

Abeysekera v. Harmanis Appu et al. In Gooneratne v. Dingiri Bander Bonser

C.j., with whom \Vithers J. concurred, held that the proper remedy, where the

consent of a party to a case instituted in the District Court was obtained by fraud

and so judgment obtained, was to apply to the Supreme Court for an order on the

Court bdow to review che impugned judgment and to confirm or rescind it.

In the case of KusumawrJthie v. Wfjesinghe,3 the Petitioner alleged that she was married

to one Wijesinghe and they lived as husband and wife. Wijesinghe died on 24.07.1996

while living with her at the matrimopjal home. After the death of Wijesinghe, she applied

) to the Department of Pensions, for her dues, where she was shown an ex parte decree

obtained by \tVijesinghe dissolving the marrIage. The Petitioner contended that there was

no such divorce and she was unaware of the ex parte decree and sought relief by way of

restitutio in integrum to remedy the injustice caused to he~ by abuse and misuse of the legal

process.

It was held that relief by way of restitutio in integrum of a judgment of an original court may

be sought where the judgment had been obtained by fraud by the proquction of false

evidence, non~disclosure of material facts or by force.

J ayasinghe J held: )

"When a par~)' appears and complains that she has been wronged by a process of law, this Court

would riot helplessly watch and a110w the fraud practised oh that party to be perpetuated.

Restitutio in integrum provides this Court the necessary apparatus to step in and rectify any

miscarriage of and failure o.fjustice. If this is not the case then there is a serious vacuum in the law,

which can be made use of by designing individuals as the Petitioner alleges had happened to her."

1 14 N.L.R 353 24 N.L.R 249 32001 (3) Sri L.R. 238 5

/

j I /

-.---

The above judgment was .followed in a similar case of Paujis v. Joseph and Others,4 in

which too, a divorce had been obtained by fraud, but the Court of Appeal granted

restitution.

(b) False Evidence: where the judgment has been obtained by the production of false

evidence, the remedy is available by proceedings by way of restitutio in integrum, or

even in an action in the D].strict Court on the ground of fraud to set aside the

judgment. But, an action cannot be prosecuted in an inferior court with the direct

object of setting aside a decree of a superior court ~ }vliddleton J. Buyzer v.1fckertS

In this case, the Plaintiff instituted an action to claim damages against the

Defendant on the ground that he had maliciously placed false documentary

evidence to cancel his Hcence.

( c) N on ~disclosure of material facts: where the judgment has been obtained by non~

disclosure of material facts, it can be set aside. Withers J. referring to the facts in

Perera v. Ekanaike commented - "This appears to be an attempt to set aside a

judgment of consent between the present Plaintiff and the present Defendant on

the ground either that the judgn:.ent was obtained by fraud~the fraud being that

plaintiff, well knO\ving the facts of the settlement on or after 1884, concealed that

fact from Court, and so obtained a judgment which othervvise she would never

have obtained, or on the ground that these facts through ignorance of the present

parties had been kept back from the Judge who passed the judgment under a

mistake and in ignorance of facts which had he knovVn he would not have passed

the judgment in question- Perera v. Ekanaike.6

(d) Deception: The Defendant was in prison when he was sued on a bond. Being

deceived by the Plaintiff he made no effort to appear in the action, and judgment

was entered for Plaintiff. It was held that his remedy was either to apply for

restitutio in integrum or to seek damages for the fraud. The reason why the Defendant

42005 (3) Sri L.R. 162 513 N.L.R. 371 63 N.L.R. 21 6

did not appear in the action was not that he was prevented by misfortune, but that

he was deceived and defraudedJ.:lyasuriya v: Kotalawela.7

(e) Fresh evidence: In an application for restitutio in integrum on the ground of discovery

of fresh evidence after decree, the Petitioner must show that he was unable, with

reasonable diligence, to obtain the evidence sooner, and that the evidence produced

would, if believed, be decisive in his favour- William 5ingho v. Thegis

AppullCUl1 y.,3

"I conceive that in cases where judgments have been pronounced by mistake and

decrees entered thereon (except perhaps such mistakes as I have already referred

to), or where it is alleged that fresh evidence has cropped up since judgment which

was unknown earlier to the parties relying on it before judgment, or in case of fraud

discovered within a short time of judgment and before a change has taken place in

the position of parties, the remedy may be by way of the proceedings indicated by

me for restitutio in inLegrum"-Per Middleton J. in Sjnnatalnby v. Nallatamby 9

Voet says that, "the discovery of fresh evidence, res noviter vcniens ad noitiam (facts

newly coming to knowlcdg~)is recognized as a good ground for giving this relief

provided, of course, it is evidence which no reasonable diligence would have helped

to disclose earlier.

It was held, by Soertsz J. in the case of Mapalathan v. -flayavan,lO that the Supreme

Court has no power to revise or review a case decided by itself. Relief by way of

restitution on the ground of justus error will not be granted to a party who has failed

to place before the Court matter, which was' at his command, if reasonable

diligence had been exercised.

723 N.L.R.Sll 81 c.L.W. 148 97 N.L.R 139

10 41 N.L.R.l1S 7

In order to succeed in an application for restitution the Petitioner must show that

the fact was not merely material but of such vital and essential materiality that it

must have altered the whole aspect of the case.

(f) Mistake: Where a Proctor under the general authority given to him by a proxy

enters into a compromise vvith regard to an action, such a compromise is binding

upon his client. The fact that there is a limitation of that apparent authority does

not affect the authority to compromise, unless that limitation is communicated to

the other side.

(g)Fear: In Sahapathy v. Dunlop et al,ll it was held that "where an action has been

adjusted by agreement or compromise under Section 408 of the Civil Procedure

Code, the Supreme Court has povver to set aside, by way of restitution or revision,

a judgment entered in terms of the section, on the ground of fear or mistake. A

threat from a Judg.,;: to dismiss a plaintiff's case unless he agreed to the terms of

settlement vvould amount to fear".

Akbar]. expressed the view in the above case that, "According to Voet,12 all that is

required is that the fear should be caused by something done illegally, even by a

Magistrate". Koch]., (the other Judge of the Bench) citing a passage from Nathan in vol.

IV., s.1997, which lays down that it is the duty of a Judge in deciding cases t? act in

acc()rdance with the law, says that "this must be obviously so, and if a Judge contravene~

the law or acts improperly, there canbe no doubt that this Court can exercise its powen . by way of revision and grant felid to the aggrieved in appropriate cases, and particularl) '. so when the party concer.ned has no right of appeal as in this case".

Koch]., further expressed the view that, "1 am of opinion therefore that it is the duty 0:

the Court before passing a. decree under Section 408 of t~e Civil Procedure Code to satisf)

itself as to the legality of the agreement contemplated in that section, where th~t legaliq

is questioned on the grounds such as fraud, fear, mistake, surprise, etc., and if not satisfied

should refuse to enter an. order, but if the Judge wrongly does pass a decree, this Cour

11 37 N.L.R. 113

12 Bk. IV, tit. 2, eLla

8

l-I i i

has jurisdiction to entertain an application to have that decree set aside or altered or

modified according to circumstances both by virtue of power to grant restitution as well

as to act by way of revision, and the fact that the equitable ground upon which relief is

sought is directed against the judge who passed the decree will not alter the position".

From the above survey it is quite clear that the petitioner has not made out any of the

above grounds recognized for the invocation of restitutio in integrum. If this Court were to

take cognizance by restitutio in integrum of a matter that has been heard by the District

Court, the grounds for nullification must have been brought home to this Court.

Harking back to the provenance of this remedy I must observe that it was in the case of

Abeysekere T~ Harmanis Appu et al3 that Grenier J declared that the remedy of restitutio

in integrum is one which has taken deep root: in the practice and procedure of our Courts,

and it is far from desirable to ignore it or to declare it obsolete.14 In the same breath Wood

Renton J stated that it is too late. to hold that the remedy ought no longer to be

recognized.15

So by 1911 when Abeysekere v. Harmowis Appu et al was decided, the remedy had

become an integral part of the law of this country and was too deep-rooted not to be

acknowledged as such. _._ ..With~he enactment of the 1978 Constitution it became a constitutional remedy and the

power to grant relief by way of restitutio in integrum is now well recognized and vested in

the Court of Appeal by Article 138 (1) of the Constitution,16 which declares,

"The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise, subject to the proviSions of the Constitution or any

law, an appellate jurisdiction for the: correction all errors in fact and in law which shall be

committed by any Court of First Instance, tribunal or other institutions and sole and exclusive

recognizance, by way of appeal, revision and restitutio in integrum of all causes, SU!ts, actions,

13 (1911) 14 N.L.R 353

14 Ibid at p 359

15 Ibid at pp 358 and 359.

16 1978 Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 9

--"---.. --~-

prosecutions, matters and things of which such Court of First Instance, tribunal or other

institution may have tahen cognizance".

I have already dealt with this Article in rdation to the remedy of restitutio in integrum in

two previous precedents of this Court namely Seylan Bank PLC v. Christobel Daniels

(CA (PHC) Application No. 58/2014 decided on 14.12.2016) and Rajapakse

Mudiyanselage KarunaJ-atne v. Iluktenn:l Arachchige Piyasena (CA 02/2016 decided

on 23.05.2017). The upshot of reasoning in these cases j,<; that before there is an invocation

of this jurisdiction of restitutio in integrum in the Court of Appeal under Article 138 of the

Constitution, a Court of First Instance, tribunal or other institution must have taken

cognizance of a cause, suit, action, matter, and thing. I have omitted a reference to the

word prosecution as I take the view that restitutio in integrum has always been available in

respect of civil suits only.

No doubt the District Court took cognizance of the civil suit and entered a consent

decree. But the jurisdiction under Article 138 of the Constitution for restoration can be

exercised only if there is an order to be set aside and there is an application to restore

back the previous position or status. As I pointed out, I must emphasise that in the prayer

~o the petition no relief has been prayed for to rescind/set aside the consent decree that

was made in this case, leave alone an application to the same court which entered the

.. - --- - --consent decree. It has to be noted that even at the stage when the plaintiff respondent

complained to the Distric't Court alleging a breach of the c~msent decree, the defendant-

petitioner did not move. to call in question the decree on the strength of the several

recognized grounds for impugning a consent decree. Thus there is a jurisdictional defect

that taints this application.

Restitutio in integrum is only available in respect of proceedings if there is an allegation oj

fraud or other vitiating factors~see the reiteration of these principles in Sri Lank~

Insurance Corporation Ltd v. Shanmugam and anotherY There is no allegatior

whatsoever in the pleadings that there has been a fraud or a judgment obtained in tht

17 (1995) 1 SrLLR 55 per Ranaraja .I (with 5.1\1. Silva J concurring as he then was) at page 60.

10

~ Il /"" , ,

,iA. -,., ".'

J,

court a quo in a fraudulent manner-see Kusumawathie v. Wijesinghe(supra). I would also

advert to Phipps v. BracegirdJd8 wherein jt was held that "Relief by way of restitutio in

integrum from the effect of an order in judicial proceedings will not be granted where the

legality of such order is not questioned."

It has to be borne in mind that an application for restitutio in integrum is an exceptional

remedy and it is granted only on limited grounds and only in exceptional

circumstances.

Restitutio in integrum is not available as a matter of right and cannot be invoked as such. The

remedy is discretionary which the Court can grant only in exceptional circumstances,

when there is no other" remedy available-see Perera v. Wijewickrema,19

MenchinahanlY v. Muniweera et al,20 and CA R1/0l/2016 (argued and decided on

23.05.2016).21 On her own admission the Defendant-fetitioner avers in paragraph 11 of

the petition that she has sought both leave to appeal and revision in the Provincial High

Court holden in Gampaha (CALA 03/2012) and thus in my view this is not a fit case for

this Court to exercise its discretionary jurisdiction of nstitutio in integrum.

On the above analysis I take the view that the Defendant-Petitioner has not made out any

grounds for the exercise of restitutio in integrum and I accordingly reject and dismiss the

. -Defendant-Petitioner's application.

-JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

18 35 N.L.R 302

19 (1912) 15 N.L.R 411 at 413 per Pereira J (with Ennis J concurring)

20 (1950) 52 N.L.R 409 at 414 per Dias S.P.J with Gunasekera J in agreement

21 Nawaz J with H.CJ. Madawala J agreeing 11