IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST . REPUBLIC 01.' SRI LANKA

C.A. Revision Application No: CA (PHC) APN 177/2017

H.e. Colombo Case No: HCMCA 1242/06

M.e. Maligakanda Case No: 338/06/C

In the matter of an application for revision in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

O.I.C, Police Station, Maradana. Complainant

Vs.

Haaji Mohommadu Fazal Mohommadu, No. 05, School Road, Kalawewa, Vij i thapura.

AND NOW BETWEEN

Haaji Mohommadu Fazal Mohommadu,

Accused

No. 05, School Road, Kalawewa, V ij i thapura. Accused-Petitioner

Vs. 1. O.I.C,

Page 1 cf 13

Police Station, Maradana.

l I '

.~ 1

~ 1 I 1 t ! I I I

1 1

f j I l ,

I ; ,

! .1 I ! I 1 1

j I ! t

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

DECIDED ON

K.K.WICKREMASINGHE, J.

2. Hon. Attorney General Attorney-General's Department, Colombo 12. Com plainan t-Responden ts

K. K. Wickremasinghe, J.

Jandk De Silva, J

AAL Rushdie Habeeb with AAL Rizwan Uwais for the Accused-Respondent

Nayomi Wickremasekara, SSC for the Complainant-Respondent

17.10.2018

The Accused-Petitioner - On 12.10.2018 Tht Respondents - On 17.10.2018

13. 1.2018

The Accused-Petitioner has filed this revision application seeking to set aside the

sentencing order of the Learned Magistrate of Maligakanda dated 17.11.2006 in

Case No. 338/06/C.

Facts of the case:

The accused-petitioner (hereinafter referred to as the 'petitioner') was arrested by

Maradana Police on a complaint made by his own bother and was charged in the

Magistrate's Court of Maligakanda for committing lurking house-trespass by night

and theft in dwelling house, offences punIshable under sections 443 and 369 of the

Penal Code. The petitioner had pleaded' guilty to both charges and the Learned

Page 2 of 13

!

1 1 1 I I

\

1 ! f i 1

4 ;

1 1

1 1

1 j i :l j I I

1 I 'J I I

Magistrate convicted the petitioner only for the first charge i.e. section 443 of the

Penal Code. Accordingly the Learned Magistrate had imposed a term of 24 months

simple imprisonment and converted the same to a period of rehabilitation on

17.11.2006.

Thereafter the petitioner had appealed to the High Court of Colombo against the

order of the Learned Magistrate and the appeal was later withdrawn. The case was

~ called on 27.10.2017 in the Magistrate Court of Maligakanda and the complainant

has submitted a letter indicating his unwillingness of the punishment on the

accused. The Learned Magistrate has affirmed the order and ordered to implement

it from 27.10.2017.

Being aggrieved by the order of the Learned Magistrate dated 17.11.2006, the

petitioner preferred a revision application to this Court.

The Learned Counsel for the petitioner submitted that the sentence imposed by the

Learned Magistrate on 17.11.2006 was excessive, illegal and contrary to law for

the following reasons;

a) The Learned Magistrate has biled to assign reasons to Impose the

maximum sentence of 24 months,

b) The sentence was excessive wheJ considering the fact that the petitioner

pleaded guilty to the both charges at the earliest possible instance,

c) The Learned Magistrate has failed to consider the facts and

circumstances, under which the petitioner had committed the offence,

d) The Learned Magistrate has LjJed to consider that there would be a

substantial miscarriage of justice ':0 the petitioner in the event that the

sentence imposed on him as a reque3't made by the mother of the petitioner,

e) The Learned Magistrate has failed to consider that the petitioner was a

first offender with no previous convictions and pending cases,

f) The petitioner is a married man and his wife is unemployed.

We observe that these grounds appear to be grounds of appeal rather than

exceptional circumstances. It is well settled law that revisionary power of court

shall be invoked only upon the demonstration of exceptional circumstances by the

petitioner.

In the case of Rasheed Ali V. Mohamed .\Ii (1981) 2 SLR 29 it was held that,

"The powers of revision conferred on the Court of Appeal are very wide and , the Court has discretion to exercise them whether an appeal lies or not or

whether an appeal had been taken or not. However this discretionary

remedy can be invoked only where there are exceptional circumstances

, warranting the intervention of the court ... "

In the case of M. Roshan Dilruk Fernando V. AG rCA (PHC) 03/2016], it was

held that,

"In the present case the Petitioner as of a right would have appealed against

the sentence on a question of law. wYithout exercising that right of appeal, he

opted to move Court in revision. It is settled law that the extraordinary

jurisdiction of revision can be invc,ked only on establishing the exceptional

circumstances. The requirement of :!xceptional circumstances has been held

in a series of authorities.

Therefore it is mandatory to demonstrate exceptional circumstances. The revision

power of court is directed towards the correction of errors and its object is the due

administration of justice.

Page 4 of 13

1 I , I { { , I

In the case of W.M.F.G. Fernando V. Rev Sr. Marie Bernard and others

[C.A.II08/99 (F)], it was held that,

"It is trite law that the purpose of revisionary jurisdiction is supervisory in

nature, and that the object is the proper administration of justice. In

Attorney General v Gunawarderia (1996) 2 SLR 149 it was held that:

"Revision, like an appeal, is directed towards the correction of errors, but it

is supervisory in nature and its object is the due administration of justice

and not, primarily or solely, the relieving of grievances of a party. An

appeal is a remedy, which a party who is entitled to it, may claim to have as

of right, and its object is the grant of relief to a party aggrieved by an order

of court which is tainted by error . .. "

In the case of Mariam Beebee V. Seyed Mohamed (1995) 68 NLR 36 it was held

that,

"The power ofrevision is an extraordinary power which is quite independent

of and distinct from the appellate jurisdiction of this court. Its object is the

due administration of justice and the correction of errors, sometimes

committed by this court itself, in order to avoid a miscarriage of justice ... "

Therefore we are of the view that the revisionary jurisdiction cannot be invoked to

solely relieve the grievances of a party.

The Learned Counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the appeal made to the

High Court was withdrawn since there were no relatives to follow up with the case

and the virtual complainant had forced the mother of the petitioner to withdraw the

appeal. However we observe that the petitioner has not submitted relevant

documents of the said appeal to this Court including petition of appeal and court

Page j of 13

,

~ I

1

1 1 I i I I I \ .j j

~ l ; i 1 I

proceedings. Therefore we are unable to Iicruse any documents related to the said

appeal.

In the case of Dahanayake and others V. Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation

Ltd. and others (2005) 1 Sri L.R. 67, it W:lS held that,

"If there is no full and truthful disclosure of material facts, the Court would

not go into the merits of the application but will dismiss it without further

examination ... "

In the case of Lokugalappaththige Cyril & Others V. Attorney General [S.C

(Spl.) L.A. No. 272/2013] it was held that,

"In a brief manner a fair and full disclosure of all material facts would be

essential and should be pleaded in applications to Superior Courts by

parties aggrieved of orders and jud?ments of the lower courts. In the same

manner a ''plain and concise statements of all facts and material" would be

mandatory for special leave to Appe'a1 Applications to the Supreme Court ... "

In light of the above cases we are of the view that the documents related to the

High Court appeal are material to the instant application and the petitioner has

failed to submit the same. The Rule 3(1) (a) of the Court of Appeal (Appellate

Procedure) Rules 1990 requires a petitioner to tender all the documents material to

an application and in an event a petitioner fails to comply with such provisions, the

Court may ex mero motu or at the instance of any party, dismiss such application.

Accordingly the failure to submit the said High Court case records would amount

to suppression of mcts.

In the case of Shanmugavadivu V. Kulathilake (2003) 1 Sri L.R. 215, it was

held that,

Page 6 (If 13

"According to Rule 3(1) (a) it is ne-:.essary for an application to be made by

way of petition together with an affidavit is support of the averments and

these should be accompanied by the originals of documents material to such

application. Rule 3(b) specifically :efers to the application made by way of

revision or restitution in integrum jlnd states that those too should be made

in like manner referred to in 'Rule 3 (1) (a) with copies of relevant

proceedings including pleadings and documents produced in the Court of

First Instance, tribunal or other institution to which such application

I " re ates ...

Therefore compliance of Rule 3 is imperative in a revision application.

Further we observe that this revision application was filed on 28.11.2017 whereas

the order of sentence was imposed on 17.11.2006. Accordingly there has been a

delay of more than 10 years and the petitioner has failed to give reasons for the

delay. The Learned SSC for the respond!nt has contended that the failure on the

part of the petitioner to explain the delaJ amounts to a dismissal of the revision

application. We observe the case of S.l\1.A.A. Priyantha Jayakody V. OIC,

Police station, Mawarala and another [CA/PHC/l19/2004] in which A.W.A.

Salam, J(P/CA) has cited following two cases;

"Camillus Ignatious vs OIC Uhana Police Station (Rev) CA 907/89,

M.C.Ampara 2587. It was held th':1t a mere delay of 4 months in filing a

Revision Application was fatal to the prosecution of the Revision

Application.

Opatha Mudiyanselage Nimal Pe;rera vs A.G - CACRev) 532/97 -Kandy

HC 1239/92, where His Lordship Justice F.N.D. Jayasuriya stated that

"These matters must be considered in limine before the court decides to hear

Page 7 of 13

Petitioner on the merit of his appLication before he could pass the gateway

to relief his aforesaid contumacous conduct and his unreasonable and

undue delay in filing application must be considered and determination

made upon these matters before he is heard on the merit of the application. "

, In the case of Seylan Bank V. Thangaveil (2004) 2 Sri L.R. 101, it was held that,

"Unexplained and unreasonable ('elay in seeking relief by way of revision,

\ which is a discretionary remed~, is a factor which will disentitle the

petitioner to it. An application forjudicial review should be made promptly

unless there are good reasons for the delay. The failure on the part of the

petitioner to explain the delay satisfactorily is by itself fatal to' the

application. "

In the case of M.M.P. Fernando V. S.M. Podimanike and others lCA (PUC)

APN 11312010], it was held that,

"It is well established principle that a party who has no alternative remedy

can invoke revisionary jurisdiction of Court of Appeal only upon

establishment of exceptional circkmstances ... Further I would also like to

consider a judgment of Justice Udalagama in Devi Property Development

(Pvt) ltd., and another vs Lanka ft(tdical (Pvt) ltd., C.A.5J8/0J decided on

20.06.2001. His Lordship in the said judgment observed thus: "Revision is

an extraordinary jurisdiction vt!sted in court to be exercised under

exceptional circumstances, if no other remedies are available. Revision is

not available until and unless other remedies available to the Petitioner are

exhausted ... "

Page ~J of 13

Therefore we are of the view that a petitioner who seeks a discretionary remedy

should act promptly since an inordinate and unexplained delay in seeking such

relief would disentitle the petitioner to it.

In the case of Rustom V. Uapangama (1978-79) 2 SLLR 225, it was stated that,

"The trend of authority clearly indicates that where the revisionary powers

of the Court of Appeal are invokeu' the practice has been that these powers

i will be exercised if there is an qiternative remedy available only if the

existence of special circumstances are urged necessitating the indulgence of

this court to exercise these powers in revision. If the existence of special

circumstances does not exist then this court will not exercise its powers in . . " reVISIOn ...

Accordingly it is observed that the pra~tice of Court is to exercise revisionary

powers only upon existence of exceptional circumstances if there is an alternative

remedy available. In the instant application, the petitioner could have availed his

right of appeal against the order of the Learned Magistrate to the High Court

and/or to the Court of Appeal. We obsetile that a warrant had been issued on the

petitioner on 23.01.2008 and he was arrested and produced before the Learned

Magistrate of Maligakanda on 14.09.2016. Therefore we think that the petitioner

was absconding for 08 years instead of naking an appeal to an Appellate Court.

The petitioner seems to have filed a revision application as an alternative to the

appeal since his period of appeal had expired by the time of the order of

implementation.

In the case of Attorney General V. P. Dharma Sri Wijerathna rCA (PUC) APN

246/2004], it was held that,

Page 9,of 13

l 1 ! I 1 l I

"Appeal being a statutory right the accused was entitled to appeal, provided

he appealed in time. Even an accl/sed who had absconded during the trial

has a right to appeal provided he complies with the Supreme Court Rules

and the other provisions of the law and makes the appeal in time ... In

Suddage Gamini Rajapakse J< i The State (CA Appplication 30/98)

Kulathilaka, J held that,' "An accused who had absconded has no right to

invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of the court" he had further held that the \ discretionary remedy by way of revision will not be available to a person

who was guilty of contumacious conduct ... "

Before he could pass the gate W&y to relief, his aforesaid contumacious

conduct and undue delay in jilir.g the application for revision must be

considered and a determination mdde upon those matters before he is heard

on the merits of the application"

In this Dharma Sri case the accused was tried in absentia as he was absconding.

However in the instant application the petitioner did not appear in Court after he

was convicted. Therefore we are of the view that the behavior of a convicted

person should be considered in a stricter manner than of an accused or a suspect.

In the case of Dharmaratne and another V. Palm Paradise Cabanas Ltd.

(2003) 3 SLR 24, it was held that,

"Existence of exceptional circumstances is the process by which the court

selects the cases in respect of which the extraordinary method of

rectification should be adopted. {f such a selection process is not there

revisionary jurisdiction of this court will become a gateway of every litigant

to make a second appeal in the garb of a Revision application or to make an

appeal in situations where the legis!ature has not given a right of appeal ... . ,

Page 10 of 13

1 I 1 ! 1

It is noteworthy that the Learned Magi-strate had ordered the term of simple

l imprisonment to be converted to a term o~ rehabilitation on request of the mother , of the petitioner.

It was held in the case of Attorney G1eneral V. Jinak Sri Uluwaduge and

another [1995) 1 Sri L R 157 that;

"In determining the proper sentenc,e the Judge should consider the gravity

of the offence as it appears from the nature of the act itself and should have

regard to the punishment provided in the Penal Code or other statute under

which the offender is charged. He should also regard the effect of the

punishment as a deterrent and consider to what extent it will be effective.

Incidence of crimes of the nature of which the offender has been found guilty

and the difficulty of detection are :also matters which should receive due

consideration. The Judge should also take into account the nature of the loss

to the victim and the profit that may accrue to the culprit in the event of non-

detection.

In the case of The Attorney General V. H.N. de Silva 57 NLR 121, it was held

that,

"In assessing the punishment that should be passed on an offender, a Judge

should consider the matter of sentence both from the point of view of the

public and the offender. Judges are too often prone to look at the question

only from the angle of the offender A Judge should, in determining the

proper sentence, first consider the gravity of the offence as it appears from

the nature of the act itself and .s 10uld have regard to the punishment

provided in the Penal Code or other statute under which the offender is

Page 11 )f 13

~jF.. . -

charged. He should also regard If.e effect of the punishment as a deterrent

and consider to what extent it willE e effective.

After considering the punishment prescri Jed in the Penal Code for the offence of

lurking house-trespass by night i.e. a term of imprisonment which may extend to

five years and a fine, we see no reason L) interfere with the order of the Learned

Magistrate dated 17.11.2006.

Considering above, we are of the view that this revision application should stand

dismissed. Therefore we affirm the order of the Learned Magistrate dated

17.11.2006 and further we direct the sa.d order to be implemented from today,

namely 13.11.2018.

Accordingly the revision application is di:;missed without costs.

Registrar is directed to send this order to the relevant Magistrate's Court of

Maligakanda to take immediate steps to apprehend the accused-petitioner.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Janak De Silva, J.

I agree .

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Page V of 13

r 1

I j

~ i j 1 ]

! i 1 !

I I I ! I

:~

i I 1 1 1 I

'.

Cases referred to:

1. Rasheed Ali V. Mohamed Ali (1981) 2 SLR 29 2. M. Roshan Dilruk Fernando V. AG rCA (PHC) 03/2016]

3. W.M.F.G. Fernando V. Rev Sr. Marie Bc.nard and others [C.A.l108/99 (F)]

4. Mariam Beebee V. Seyed Mohamed (19%) 68 NLR 36

5. Dahanayake and others V. Sri Lanka Ins~rance Corporation Ltd. and others (2005) 1 Sri

L.R. 67

6. Lokugalappaththige Cyril & Others V. Attorney General [S.C (Spl.) L.A. No. 27212013]

7. Shanmugavadivu V. Kulathilake (2003) 1 Sri L.R. 215

8. S.M.A.A. Priyantha Jayakody V. OIC, Police station, Mawarala and another

[CA/PHCIl19/2004]

9. Seylan Bank V. Thangaveil (2004) 2 Sri L.R. 101

10. M.M.P. Fernando V. S.M. Podimanike and others rCA (PHC) APN 113/2010]

11. Rustom V. Hapangama (1978-79) 2 SLLR 225

12. Attorney General V. P. Dharma Sri Wijerathna rCA (PHC) APN 246/2004]

13. Dharmaratne and another V. Palm Paradise Cabanas Ltd. (2003) 3 SLR 24

14. Attorney General V. Jinak Sri Uluwadugt ~md another [1995] 1 Sri L R 157

15. The Attorney General V. H.N. de Silva 57 NLR 121

Page 13 of 13