Page 1 of 11

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal from the final judgment in the District Court of Kalmunai in Case No. 1641/L. CASE NO: CA/DCF/1395/00 D.C. Kalmunai No. 1641/L

Athamkandu Seenathumma, Tamil Division, Sammanthurai.

Plaintiff

Vs.

1. S. L. Abdul Rahman 2. S. L. Adam Lebbe alias

Bawa 3. A. B. Sulaima Lebbe

All of Division No. 1, Sammanthurai. Defendants

AND BETWEEN

Athamkandu Seenathumma (Decesased) Tamil Division, Sammanthurai. Plaintiff-Appellant

Abdul Majeed Ashraf Ali,

Tamil Division, Sammanthurai. Substituted Plaintiff Appellant

Page 2 of 11

Vs. 1. S. L. Abdul Rahman,

No. 251, Ampara Road, Sammanthurai. 2. S. L. Adam Lebbe Alias Bawa,

No. 256, Hospital Road, Sammanthurai 01. 3. A. B. Sulaima Lebbe (Now

Deceased) 3a.S.L. Abdul Rahman,

No. 251, Ampara Road, Sammanthurai 3b.S.L. Adam Bawa

No. 256, Hospital Road, Sammanthurai 01. 3c.S.L. Akber,

No. 256, Hospital Road, Sammanthurai 01. Substituted 3a, 3b and 3c Defendant-Respondents.

Before: M. T. MOHAMMED LAFFAR, J. and K. K. A. V. SWARNADHIPATHI, J. Counsel: N. M. Shaheed with Husni M. Rizni for the Substituted

Plaintiff-Appellant. M. Nizam Kariapper with M.I.M. Iynullah for the Substituted

Defendant-Respondnets. Written Submissions on: 22.07.2020 (by the Substituted Plaintiff-

Appellant). 21.07.2020 (by the Substituted Defendant-Respondents).

Decided on: 14.07.2021.

Page 3 of 11

MOHAMMED LAFFAR, J.

This is an appeal from the judgment of the learned District Judge of

Kalmunai dated 12-01-2000.

The facts, briefly in this case are as follows:

The plaintiff-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the appellant) instituted

action in the District Court of Kalmunai on 18-04-1983, against the 1st, 2nd

and 3rd defendant-respondents (hereinafter referred to as the respective

respondents) seeking inter-alia, for a declaration of title to the premises

morefully described in schedule B of the plaint and the ejectment of the

respondents therefrom.

The respondents moved for a dismissal of the appellants action on the

footing that they have acquired prescriptive title to the subject matter.

After trial, the learned District Judge, having accepted the paper title of the

appellant to the land in suit, dismissed the action on the basis that the

respondents have obtained prescriptive title to the same. Being aggrieved

by the judgment, the appellant has preferred the instant appeal.

Identification of the subject matter:

In a re-vindicatio action, it is a burden cast upon the plaintiff to identify the

corpus, to which the judgment was prayed for. If the subject matter is not

properly identified, the action will fail.

In this regard, I refer to the case of Saravanamuthu vs. Packiyam and

Another1. This is a case where the District Judge entered judgment in

favour of the plaintiff, for a declaration of title to the corpus. In appeal, the

provincial High Court set aside the said judgment and sent the case back

to the District Court for a trial de-novo, on the basis that the corpus was

not identified. The Supreme Court set aside the order of the Provincial High

Court and affirmed the judgment of the District Judge, on the footing that

1 [2012] 1 Sri LR 298.

Page 4 of 11

the Defendant is not in a position to raise an issue before the appellate Court,

pertaining to the identification of the corpus, where the corpus was admitted

by him before the trial judge, and when there was no issue before the trial

judge, in respect of the identification of the corpus, it cannot be taken up in

appeal as an issue.

The corpus in this case is morefully described in schedule B of the plaint

which is in extent of Five acres (5A-0R-0P). For the purpose of this action,

Mr. K. Retnarajah, Licensed Surveyor has made a plan marked P1 and the

report of the Commissioner is produced as P1a. Having superimposed the

title plans, the Commissioner has properly identified the subject matter as

lots 2, 3, 4 and 5 in plan P1 which is the land described in schedule B.

It is pertinent to note that, although the respondents had taken up the

position in their answer that the subject matter was not properly identified,

they failed to frame an issue in this regard. In the case of Hanafi vs.

Nallamma2 the Supreme Court held that ..Once issues are framed the

case which the court has to hear and determine becomes crystallised in the

issues and the pleadings recede to the background

In the circumstances, it is clear that the question of the identification of the

subject matter in this case was not put in issue before the trial Judge.

Hence, the respondents are precluded from taking up such an issue in

appeal.

Title of the plaintiff to the subject matter:

It is settled law that, in revindicatio actions the onus of proof of title to the

subject matter is always with the plaintiff. In the event of failure on the part

of the plaintiff to establish his title, his action is liable to be dismissed.

2 [1998] 1 Sri LR 73.

Page 5 of 11

In the case of Dharmadasa vs. Jayasena3 it was observed that in a rei

vindicatio action the burden is on the plaintiff to establish the title pleaded

and relied on by him. The defendant need not prove anything.

In the instant case, one Velupillai Kathirama Thamby by virtue of the Crown

Grant bearing No.14977 dated 31-05-1907 marked P2, became the owner

of the paddy land called Malukkampuddi in extent of Twenty acres and

Twenty Two perches (20A-0R-22P) which is morefully described in schedule

A of the plaint. Thereupon, the said Velupillai Kathirama Thamby, by Deed

No. 6410 dated 21-03-1932 attested by P.K. Velupillai, Notary Public

marked P3, had gifted an undivided Five acres to his son, Kathirama

Thamby Sithamparapillai who later became Swamy and was known as

Swamy Nadarajananthar. The said Swamy Nadarajananthar by Deed

bearing No. 12082 dated 09-11-1943 attested by P.K. Velupillai, Notary

Public marked P4, gifted his rights to Kathirama Thamby Theivanapillai.

Thereafter, the said Kathirama Thamby Theivanapillai and other co-owners

of the larger land, (land in schedule A) namely Kathirama Thamby

Alagaratnam, Kathirama Thamby Sivasidamparam and Kathirama Thamby

Chellamma, having executed a Deed of Partition bearing No. 1581 dated 22-

05-1951 attested by Santhiresegari, Notary Public marked P5, got their

undivided rights devided. Accordingly, the said Kathirama Thamby

Theivanapillai became the owner of the land in suit which is described in

schedule B, who had conveyed the same to the plaintiff (A. Zeenathumma)

by Deed No. 3694 dated 09-04-1982 attested by N. Rasiah, Notary Public

marked P6. Accordingly, the appellant became the owner of the land in suit.

It is to be noted that the learned trial Judge has accepted the paper title of

the appellant, and thereafter, dismissed the appellants action on the basis

that the respondents have acquired prescriptive title to the subject matter.

Hence, the only question to be determined in this appeal is as follows:

3 [1997] 3 Sri LR 327.

Page 6 of 11

Whether the respondents, in terms of section 3 of the Prescription

Ordinance, have acquired prescriptive title to the subject matter?

Prescriptive title of the respondents to the land in dispute:

In re vindicatio actions, once the paper title of the plaintiff is established,

the onus of proof shifts to the defendant to establish his legal entitlement

to be in possession of the subject matter. In the event of failure on the part

of the defendant to prove his legal entitlement, there is no option for the

trial judge, but to enter a judgment in favour of the plaintiff as prayed for

in the prayers to the plaint.

In Don Namaratne vs. Don David 4 , S. N. Silva, CJ, (agreeing with

Bandaranayake, J. and Yapa, J.) held that,

The learned Presidents counsel for the Defendant submits that the

plaint is defective since the date on which wrongful possession on the

part of the Defendant commenced is not set out. We cannot agree with

this submission. The owner is entitled to possession of his property at

all times. The rights of others are subject to the right of ownership. Once

the title of the Plaintiff is admitted or proved, the burden shifts to the

Defendant to prove his right to possess the property. If the Defendant

fails to prove the right [Tenancy, licensee superior title] judgment to be

entered in favour of the Plaintiff. In the re-vindicatio action, if the title

of the Plaintiff is admitted by the Defendant, the Defendant should

begin the case.

In Sirinivasam Prasanth vs. Nadaraja Devaraja5, recently the Supreme

Court reiterated the above position as follows:

per Mahinda Samayawardena, J.

In a vindicatory action, the initial burden is on the Plaintiff to prove

title to the property. If he fails to prove title, the Plaintiffs action shall

4 SC Appeal No. 54/2002, SC Minuites of 17.02.2003. 5 SC Appeal No. 163/2019, SC Minutes of 22.03.2021.

Page 7 of 11

fail, no matter how weak the case of the Defendant is. However, once

the paper title to the property is accepted by the Defendant or proved

by the Plaintiff, the burden shifts to the Defendant to prove on what

right he is in possession of the property.

In the instant case, the respondents are claiming a prescriptive right to the

land in dispute. Thus, the burden is on the respondents to prove the

purported claim of prescriptive title with strong and cogent evidence in

terms of section 3 of the Prescription Ordinance which reads thus:

Proof of the undisturbed and uninterrupted possession by a defendant

in any action, or by those under whom he claims, of lands or immovable

property, by a title adverse to or independent of that of the claimant or

plaintiff in such action (that is to say, a possession unaccompanied by

payment of rent or produce, or performance of service or duty, or by

any other act by the possessor, from which an acknowledgment of a

right existing in another person would fairly and naturally be inferred)

for ten years previous to the bringing of such action, shall entitle the

defendant to a decree in his favour with costs. And in like manner,

when any plaintiff shall bring his action, or any third party shall

intervene in any action for the purpose of being quieted in his

possession of lands or other immovable property, or to prevent

encroachment or usurpation thereof, or to establish his claim in any

other manner to such land or other property, proof of such undisturbed

and uninterrupted possession as herein before explained, by such

plaintiff or intervenient, or by those under whom he claims, shall entitle

such plaintiff or intervenient to a decree in his favour with costs:

It is trite law that any person who claims prescriptive title to a land, must

prove the fact that he was in possession of such land at least for a period of

10 years. It is pertinent to note that, having raised the issues No. 07 and

08, the respondents are claiming the land in dispute on prescription on the

basis that they have been in possession of the same for more than 05 years.

Page 8 of 11

The issues No. 07 and 08 framed by the respondents are reproduced as

follows:

7. Are the defendants possessing the land which is morefully

described in the schedule B of the plaint and lot No.3 in the plan for

more than 05 years considering as their own land?

8. If answered to the above issue in the affirmative, is the defendants

are prescribed for this land?

Since, there is no issue framed by the respondents stating that they are in

possession of the corpus for a period of 10 years, the respondents are not

entitled to claim the prescriptive title to the same. Besides, it is manifestly

clear from the issues No. 07 and 08 that the respondents have admitted the

fact that they are in possession of the land in suit less than 10 years. In the

circumstances, this Court is of the view that the respondents have not

acquired prescriptive title to the land in dispute.

Furthermore, the attention of this Court is drawn to the fact that though

the respondents in their answer claimed title to the subject matter upon a

Deed bearing No. 11861 dated 23-10-1956 attested by C. Gnanamuttu,

Notary Public, at the trial, they have opted not to claim rights upon the said

deed.

Besides, the 1st respondent in his evidence categorically asserted that his

fathers name (3rd respondent) has been entered in the paddy land registry

marked D1 in 19806. This case was instituted in the District Court of

Kalmunai in 1983. As such, the only document, D1 produced by the

respondents does not substantiate the possession of the respondents for a

period of 10 years.

The witnesses who gave evidence on behalf of the respondents, namely

Vattavithanai Ismalebbe, Mohamed Haneefa Thajeem (Grama Niladari),

Udumalebbe Abdul Careem (owner of the adjoining land) and the

6 Vide page 127 of the Appeal brief.

Page 9 of 11

respondents merely asserted that the respondents were in possession by

cultivating the land in suit. The attention of this Court is drawn to the fact

that there is no iota of evidence adduced to prove the fact that the

respondents possession was adverse against the true owner, i.e. the

appellant. Mere statements of the witnesses stating that the respondents

possessed the land in dispute can not establish the significant requirement

of adverse possession against the true owner in order to claim prescriptive

title.

In the case of De Silva vs. Commissioner General of Inland Revenue7, it

was held that a person who bases his title in adverse possession must show

by clear and unequivocal evidence that his possession was hostile to the real

owner and amounted to a denial of his title to the property claimed.

In the case of Sirajudeen vs. Abbas8 the Supreme Court held that;

Where the evidence of possession lacked consistency, the fact of

occupation alone or the payment of Municipal rates by itself is

insufficient to establish prescriptive possession.

Where a party invokes the provisions of section 3 of the Prescription

Ordinance in order to defeat the ownership of an adverse claimant to

immovable property, the burden of proof rests squarely and fairly on

him to establish a starting point for his or her acquisition of prescriptive

rights.

A facile story of walking into abandoned premises after the Japanese

air raid constitutes material far too slender to found a claim based on

prescriptive title.

As regards the mode of proof of prescriptive possession, mere general

statements of witnesses that the plaintiff possessed the land in dispute

for a number of years exceeding the prescriptive period are not

7 80 NLR 292, (Samarakoon CJ, Wijeratne J and Sharwananda J). 8 [1994] 2 Sri LR 365.

Page 10 of 11

evidence of the uninterrupted and adverse possession necessary to

support a title by prescription. It is necessary that the witnesses should

speak to specific facts and the question of possession has to be decided

thereupon by Court.

One of the essential elements of the plea of prescriptive title as provided

for in section 3 of the Prescription Ordinance is proof of possession by

a title adverse to or independent of that of the claimant or plaintiff. The

occupation of the premises must be of such character as is incompatible

with the title of the owner.

In the circumstances, this Court is of the considered view that the

respondents totally failed to adduce adequate evidence to establish their

purported claim of prescriptive title to the subject matter, and therefore, the

impugned judgment of the learned District Judge of Kalminai holding that

the respondents have acquired prescriptive title is palpably erroneous and

misconceived in law.

For the foregoing reasons, the appeal is allowed and the judgment of the

learned District Judge of Kalmunai dated 12-01-2000 is set-aside. A

judgment in favoure of the plaintiff as prayed for in the prayers to the plaint

is entered.

Since the appellant could not cultivate the subject matter from May 1982

due to the unlawful occupation of the respondents, the appellant is entitled

to the damages as prayed for in the plaint.

The issues have been answered as follows:

1. Yes.

2. Yes.

3. Yes.

4. Yes, as prayed for.

5. (a) Yes.

(b) Yes.

(c) Yes.

Page 11 of 11

6. Does not arise.

7. No.

8. No.

The learned District Judge of Kalmunai is directed to enter a decree

accordingly.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to dispatch a copy of this Judgment

along with the original case record to the District Court of Kalmunai.

Appeal allowed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

K. K. A. V. SWARNADHIPATHI, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal