IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Undugoda Pathirennehelage Vijitha

Ranjini,

No. 16/19,

Amunukumbura,

Wathurugama.

Defendant-Petitioner

CASE NO: CA/RI/254/2015

DC COLOMBO CASE NO: DDV/00319/2009

Vs.

Nilantha Prinil Kumudu

Jayawardana,

No. 190,

Gangaboda Road,

Kelanimulla,

Angoda.

Plaintiff-Respondent

(now deceased)

Thilani Jayawardana,

No. 34B/45,

Rukmalgama,

Kottawa,

Pannipitiya.

Respondent

2

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: S.A.D.S. Suraweera for the Defendant-Petitioner.

Respondent is absent and unrepresented.

Decided on: 01.02.2019

Samayawardhena, J.

The defendant-petitioner filed this application in 2015 for restitutio

in integrum seeking to set aside the decree of divorce entered

against her by the District Court in 2010 on the basis that her

deceased husband had obtained the said decree of divorce

fraudulently without serving summons on her. She states that she

came to know about the divorce when the uncle of her deceased

husband showed her the decree of divorce when she went to obtain

income generated from the coconut estate belonged to her

deceased husband. The petitioner has produced a number of

documents to convince Court that she and her deceased husband

lived together in harmony until his death. However the husband is

not there to contradict these assertions.

The learned counsel for the defendant-petitioner draws the

attention of this Court to Kusumawathie v. Wijesinghe [2001] 3 Sri

LR 238 in support of this application. However, the learned

counsel candidly admits that there is a slight variation in the said

case where there had been no proxy filed on behalf of the defendant

in the trial Court as has been done in this case (which the

defendant-petitioner now denies and disowns). In my view, that is

not a slight variation but goes to the root of the matter.

3

A copy of the District Court case record has been tendered marked

X4. According to the Journal Entry No.1, summons on the

defendant-petitioner had been issued both by registered post and

through fiscal returnable on 30.07.2009. Summons sent by

registered post has not been returned undelivered, but the fiscal

has reported to Court that summons could not be served on the

defendant-petitioner personally as the house was closed, and not

as the address was insufficient or incorrect. However on the

summons returnable date, the proxy of the defendant-petitioner

had been filed by Mr. Shirley Gurugalgoda, an Attorney-at-Law,

who is a practicing lawyer in hulftsdrop even to date.

There is no suspicion whatsoever about that proxy (which is at

page 19 of X4). The defendant-petitioners correct name, address,

National Identity Card number and her signatureeverything is

there, and the Attorney-at-Law has inter alia particularly recorded

in it that the defendant-petitioner placed her signature before him.

This is a requirement made necessary under section 59(5) of the

Civil Procedure Code (introduced by Civil Procedure Code

(Amendment) Act, No. 14 of 1997) to avert this kind of

applications.

It is significant to note that the defendant-petitioner in the petition

and the corresponding affidavit does not particularly state that the

details stated in the proxy of her are incorrect and the signature

appearing in the proxy is forged or that it is not her signature.

What she inter alia says is that The proxy filed on my behalf was

done so fraudulently and surreptitiously without my knowledge and

that I had no notice whatsoever of the above said proceedings

commenced against me.

4

It is also relevant to note that, according to the proceedings of the

District Court (at page 12 of X4), Mr. Gurugalgoda, the registered

Attorney of the defendant-petitioner, has appeared for her at the

trial date to inform the Court that the defendant-petitioner was not

contesting the case. This he has informed when he tendered the

proxy on the summons returnable date as well.

The petitioner in the petition and the corresponding affidavit says

that she made a complaint to the Fraud Bureau against Mr.

Gurugalgoda who by fraudulent means filed proxy on her behalf

without her consent. Whatever it is worth, she has not tendered a

copy of the said complaint with the petition for perusal of Court.

In the said backdrop, can this Court hold with the defendant-

petitioner without Mr. Gurugalgoda being heard? The answer to

that question is invariably in the negative. Mr. Gurugalgoda is not

a party to this application.

The thrust of the argument of the learned counsel for the

defendant-petitioner is that summons has not been served through

fiscal according to the fiscals report marked X4(a). This not

necessary. In terms of section 59(1) of the Civil Procedure Code

Summons shall ordinarily be served by registered post. This shall

never be understood as an inferior way of serving summons. As I

stated earlier, the District Court has issued summons on the

defendant-petitioner both by registered post and through fiscal at

once and summons sent by registered post was not returned

undelivered. In terms of section 60(1) of the Civil Procedure Code

The court shall, where it is reported that summons could not be

effected by registered post or where the summons having been

served and the defendant fails to appear, direct that such summons

be served personally on the defendant. Here on the summons

5

returnable date the proxy of the defendant was filed and therefore

there was no necessity to serve summons again by personal

service. Hence I am unable accept that argument in the

circumstances of this case.

This is not a fit and proper case to allow the application for

restitution. Application of the petitioner is dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal