==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0081/2023

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Section 331

(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15

of 1979, read with Article 138 (1) of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Complainant

Vs

Samaran Kamkanamlage Wasantha Wijenayaka

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Samaran Kamkanamlage Wasantha Wijenayaka

Accused – Appellant

Vs

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent

Court of Appeal

No: HCC 0081-23

High Court of

Ampara Case No

HC: 2205/21

CA/HCC/0081/2023

2 | P a g e

Before : P. Kumararatnam, J.

Pradeep Hettiarachchi, J.

Counsel : Punarji Krunasekara for the Accused-Appellant.

Azard Navavi ASG for the Respondent.

Argued on : 26.01.2026

Decided on : 31.03.2026

Pradeep Hettiarachchi, J

Judgment

1. The Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as “the Appellant”) has preferred

the present appeal against the conviction and sentence dated 07.10.2022 of the

Learned High Court Judge of Ampara. The Appellant was indicted for committing

the murder of his wife named Madawattegedara Dinusha Malkanthi an offence

punishable under Section 296 of the Penal Code.

2. When the charge was readout to the Appellant, he pleaded not guilty. The case was

tried by the Judge of the High Court without a jury. The prosecution led 7 witnesses

whereas the Appellant and three witnesses testified for the defense. At the

conclusion of the trial, the Learned Trial Judge found the Appellant guilty of the

charge and convicted him accordingly, and sentenced him to death.

3. In the appeal, only the Appellant has filed written submissions. As is evident from

those submissions, the Appellant primarily contended that the Learned Trial Judge

had erred in the analysis and evaluation of the evidence of the sole eyewitness,

CA/HCC/0081/2023

3 | P a g e

namely PW1, particularly in light of the fact that PW1 had maintained two

inconsistent versions regarding the alleged incident.

4. It was further contended that the Learned Trial Judge improperly disallowed the

marking of several vital contradictions and omissions. It was also submitted that

the Learned Trial Judge failed to observe that the evidence of PW1 was

inconsistent with the findings of the Judicial Medical Officer.

5. Furthermore, it was argued that the Learned Trial Judge failed to consider that the

Appellant and PW2 were not on good terms, thereby giving rise to the possibility

that PW1 had been coached by PW2. It was also contended that the Learned Trial

Judge failed to properly analyze the evidence of PW8 and to appreciate that the

documents marked P1X, P1Y, and P1C had not been made voluntarily by PW1.

6. Finally, it was contended that the Learned Trial Judge failed to consider the

evidence of the Appellant in its proper perspective.

7. In view of the submissions advanced by the Appellant, I shall first consider

whether the testimony of PW1 is unworthy of credit and unreliable, thereby

rendering the conviction untenable.

8. PW1, Senura Wijenayake, was the first witness to testify for the prosecution. The

Appellant is the husband of the deceased. PW1 is their only child and the sole

eyewitness to the incident.

9. According to the evidence of PW1, on the day of the incident, after finishing

school, he went to the village fair with his mother, who is the deceased in this case.

While they were at the fair, the Appellant also arrived there. The deceased and

PW1 had some refreshments from a nearby tea kiosk, whereas the Appellant had

consumed liquor with one of his friends named as ‘Janaka.’

CA/HCC/0081/2023

4 | P a g e

10. When the deceased and PW1 set off for home, the Appellant followed them and,

at one point, pulled the deceased by her hair. Thereafter, they went to a nearby

house and requested some water to drink. After having water, they proceeded

towards the tank, as the Appellant had insisted that the deceased get onto a canoe

stationed at the bank of the tank. As the deceased was reluctant to get onto the

canoe, the Appellant assaulted her, and ultimately, she got into the canoe. PW1 sat

next to the deceased.

11. Thereafter, the Appellant commenced paddling the canoe, and when it reached the

middle of the tank, he suddenly struck the deceased with the canoe paddle and

pushed her into the water. While the canoe was in motion, the deceased somehow

managed to resurface and cling to the canoe, whereupon she was again struck by

the Appellant with the paddle and fell back into the water.

12. Thereafter, the Appellant paddled the canoe towards the bank. When PW1 began

to cry, the Appellant also assaulted him and threw all the items they had purchased

at the fair into the water.

13. After returning home, the Appellant warned PW1 not to disclose the incident to

anyone and instructed him to state that the canoe had overturned in the middle of

the tank. Subsequently, the Appellant threatened PW1 that he too would be killed

and dumped in the tank if he revealed the incident to anyone. The Appellant also

set fire to the canoe paddle.

14. PW1 further stated that, when a person named Asoka inquired about the deceased,

he informed him that she had been killed by the Appellant in the tank and that he

was waiting until she surfaced. Thereafter, the said Asoka informed the police, and

investigations were commenced.

15. At the time he witnessed the incident, PW1 was a Grade 1 student. By the time he

testified before the High Court, he was still only 13 years old. He admitted that he

CA/HCC/0081/2023

5 | P a g e

had made more than one statement to the police. His evidence was that, as he had

been threatened by the Appellant that he too would be killed, he made a false

statement to the police in the first instance.

“ප්‍ර: ඒ එක පාරකවත් මේ සිද්ධියට අදාලව ම ාරු මද්ධවල් මවච්චි නැති මද්ධවල් කිව්වද? උ: තාත්තා මාව ය කරාට පස්මස් නේ මම තාත්තා කියපු එක කිව්වා. ප්‍ර: තාත්තා? උ: මව මරනවා කීවාට පස්මස් නේ මම තාත්තා කියපු එක කිව්වා. ප්‍ර: මමාකක්ද තාත්තා කියන්න කිව්මව්? උ: ඔරුව මපරලුනා කියලා. ප්‍ර: කාටද කිව්මව්? උ: මපාලිස් මාමලට.” (vide page 95 of the Appeal Brief)

16. It is to be noted that, when the initial statement was recorded from PW1 at the

bank of the tank, the Appellant was present with him. Thereafter, PW1 made four

other additional statements to the Police in separate occasions, including 2nd

statement on 11.09.2015, 3rd statement on 02.10.2015,4th statement on 05.09.2017,

and 5th statement 03.12.2017.

17. During course of the trial, the Learned Counsel for the defence marked several

contradictions in the evidence of PW1 by comparing his testimony with the

statement he had previously given to the Police.

18. In his statement to the Iginiyagala Police dated 02.10.2015, PW1 had stated that

the deceased initially fell onto the mud at the time when the Appellant struck the

deceased with the canoe paddle and pushed her into the water. However, this

account has been denied by PW1 at the trial. (vide D3, marked in evidence at page

143 of the Appeal Brief)

CA/HCC/0081/2023

6 | P a g e

19. Furthermore, PW1 testified that after the Appellant paddled the canoe to the

middle of the tank, he suddenly struck the deceased with the canoe paddle and

pushed her into the water. However, the statement given to the Police, the said

witness had stated that the Appellant pushed the deceased with the paddle and

threw her into the deepest part of the tank. (vide D4, marked in evidence at page

144 of the Appeal Brief)

20. In his statement to the Police, PW1 stated that the Appellant pulled the deceased

by her blouse and thereafter led the witness towards the canoe. In contrast, during

his testimony the witness testified that the Appellant pulled the deceased by her

hair and her hand and then proceed to take the deceased to the canoe. (vide D5,

marked in evidence at page 147 of the Appeal Brief)

21. Although, the Learned Counsel for the defence has marked 12 contradictions,

identified as D12 to D13, except D2, the Learned High Court Judge undertook a

proper and careful evaluation of each contradiction, giving them due consideration

in light of PW1 being a child witness. The Learned High Court Judge ultimately

concluded that the said contradictions did not affect the core of the prosecution's

case and that the defence had failed to establish a reasonable doubt in the

prosecution’s case.

22. In the light of the foregoing, I shall now proceed to the consider the degree of

caution that a court is required to exercise when evaluating the testimony of a child

witness.

23. Sakar - Law of Evidence – 20th Edition – Volume 02 – page 2808, where it has

been said that “When a minor child witness is giving evidence… the court has to

examine evidence of such child with utmost caution…. In the case of such

evidence court has to search for reliable corroborative evidence either orally or

documentary as a matter of prudence after being satisfied that evidence of such

child witness is itself free from infirmity and is sterling sound, in rape cases it is

CA/HCC/0081/2023

7 | P a g e

utmost necessary.” Gujraasing vs. State of MP, 2001 (1) MP LJ 202 (MP)In State

of Gujarat vs. Bachmiya Musamiya, 1993 (3) Guj LR 2456 (Guj), observed:

“There is no rule of law that the uncorroborated testimony of a child witness

and/ or a victim of sexual offence cannot be relied on without corroboration. It

may be true that the evidence of a child of tender age may be examined, with

more and extra-caution or full circumspection. If the evidence of the victim of

the sexual offence who is of tender age, if found creditworthy and reliable, can

be accepted without any corroboration… it is extremely difficult to formulate

the kind of evidence which should or would be regarded as corroboration

because its nature and extent may necessarily vary with the circumstances of

the given case and also according to the particular circumstances of the

culpability charged.” (Principles stated)

24. The corroboration for the evidence of a child witness must come from an

independent source and it may be direct or circumstantial [Mobeni Mingim vs.

Union Territory of Arunachal Pradesh, 1982 Cr LJ NOC 39 (Gau)]. There is no

bar accepting the uncorroborated testimony of a child witness, yet prudence

requires that courts should not act on the uncorroborated testimony of a child

witness [Munna v State, 1985 Cr LJ 1925, 1925: (1985) 2 Crimes 107 (All)].

25. In R v Marquard, 1993 CanLII 37 (SCC), [1993] 4 SCR 223 ascertaining the

competency of a child witness was dealt with by the Supreme Court of Canada as

follows:

“Testimonial competence is not presumed in the case of a child testifying

under s. 16 of the Canada Evidence Act. The child is placed in the same

position as an adult whose competence has been challenged. At common law,

such a challenge required the judge to inquire into the competence of the witness

to testify. Testimonial competence comprehends: (1) the capacity to observe

(including interpretation); (2) the capacity to recollect; and (3) the capacity to

communicate. The goal is not to ensure that the evidence is credible, but only

CA/HCC/0081/2023

8 | P a g e

to assure that it meets the minimum threshold of being receivable. The enquiry

is into capacity to perceive, recollect and communicate, not whether the

witness actually perceived, recollects and can communicate about the events in

question. The test is not based on presumptions of the incompetency of children

to be witnesses and is not intended to make it difficult for children to testify. It

merely outlines the basic abilities that individuals need to possess if they are to

testify.

The phrase "communicate the evidence" indicates more than mere verbal

ability. The reference to "the evidence" indicates the ability to testify about the

matters before the court. It is necessary to explore in a general way whether

the witness is capable of perceiving events, remembering events and

communicating events to the court. If satisfied that this is the case, the judge

may then receive the child's evidence under s. 16(3), after the child has

promised to tell the truth. It is not necessary to determine in advance that the

child perceived and recollects the very events at issue in the trial, as a condition

of ruling that his or her evidence be received.”

26. At this stage it is appropriate to refer to the Indian case of Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai

vs. State of Gujarat (AIR 1983-SC 753 at pp 756-758) often cited in our Courts,

where it was held:

“1) By and large a witness cannot be expected to possess a photographic

memory and to recall the details of an incident. It is not as if a video tape is

replayed on the mental screen.

2) Ordinarily, so happens that a witness is overtaken by events. The witness

could not have anticipated the occurrence which so often has an element of

surprise. The mental faculties therefore cannot be expected to be attuned to

absorb the details.

CA/HCC/0081/2023

9 | P a g e

3) The powers of observation differ from person to person. What one may notice,

and the other may not. An object or movement might emboss its image on one

person’s mind, whereas it might go unnoticed on the part another.

4) By and large people cannot accurately recall a conversation and reproduce

the very words used by them or heard by them. They can only recall the main

purpose of the conversation. It is unrealistic to expect a witness to be a human

tape recorder.

5) In regard to exact time of an incident, or the time duration of an occurrence,

usually people make their estimates by guesswork on the spur of the moment at

the time of interrogation. And one cannot expect people to make very precise or

reliable estimates of such matters. Again, it depends on the time-sense of

individuals which varies from person to person.

6) Ordinarily a witness cannot be expected to recall accurately the sequence of

events which take place in rapid succession or in a short time span. A witness

is liable to get confused or mixed up when interrogated later on.”

27. It is noteworthy that, in the present case, the inconsistencies in the testimony of

the child witness are understandable in the context in which they arose. The child

witness had witnessed the brutal killing of his mother by his own father in the

middle of the tank while they were on a canoe, and was subsequently threatened

and assaulted by the Appellant to prevent him from disclosing the incident to

anyone.

28. Therefore, the evidence of PW1 must be evaluated in that context, and he cannot

be expected to recount each and every event leading to the killing of the deceased

with mathematical precision. Accordingly, the presence of certain infirmities in

PW1’s evidence does not, by itself, erode his credibility. In the absence of any

indication that PW1 had been coached to narrate events which he did not witness,

there is no reason to disbelieve his evidence notwithstanding such infirmities.

CA/HCC/0081/2023

10 | P a g e

29. Further, the Appellant contended that the Learned Trial Judge failed to observe that

the evidence of PW1 was inconsistent with the findings of the Judicial Medical

Officer.

30. The JMO (PW12), testified that three external injuries were observed on the body

of the deceased, namely, one injury on the left hand, second injury on the left side

of the back and the third injury on the left occipital region. Two of these injuries

were identified as contusions caused by blunt force trauma and the JMO confirmed

that they had been sustained prior to death. The JMO further opined that the said

injuries could have caused either by an assault with a canoe paddle or as a result

of the deceased resisting an assault.

31. Furthermore, the testimony of the JMO revealed that the cause of death of the

deceased was drowning, which is corroborated with the testimony given by PW1

that the Appellant had assaulted the deceased with the canoe paddle and drowned

her in the middle of the tank.

32. It is also significant to note that the JMO in his testimony has explained in detail

the symptoms that can be observed in a post mortem examination of a body of

asphyxia by drowning. Furthermore, he explained why he was unable to observe

diatoms in the bone marrow of the deceased and opined that she may have fallen

into the water in an unconscious state as a result of blunt force trauma to the head.

This opinion of the Judicial Medical Officer corroborates the testimony of PW1,

who stated that the Appellant struck the deceased with a canoe paddle.

33. Although the Judicial Medical Officer stated that he could not entirely rule out the

possibility that the deceased may have lost consciousness as a result of a fall, when

the medical evidence is considered together with the testimony of PW1, it can

reasonably be inferred that the head injury was sustained due to an assault by the

Appellant.

CA/HCC/0081/2023

11 | P a g e

34. Accordingly, the medical evidence does not, in my view, contradict the testimony

of PW1, as contended by the Appellant. Hence, it is evident that the Learned High

Court Judge correctly evaluated the medical evidence of the Judicial Medical

Officer, which materially corroborated the testimony of PW1.

35. It was further contended by the Appellant that the Learned Trial Judge failed to

consider that the Appellant and PW2 were not on good terms, thereby giving rise

to the possibility that PW1 had been coached by PW2.

36. It is noteworthy that, in addition to the testimony of PW2 testified that the

Appellant and the deceased were not on good term, this account was further

corroborated by the testimony given by an independent witness. In light of the

testimony of PW6, who testified that the shortly before the Appellant, deceased,

and their son left the house after drinking water, the Appellant verbally abused the

deceased using obscene language.

“ප්‍ර: එයා එයාමේ මනෝනට යං කියලා කිව්වට පස්මස් එයා ඔරුමවන් යන්න ැහැ බීලා ඉන්මන් කිව්වට පස්මස් කුණුහරුමපන් ැන්නා. උ: කව්ද ැන්මන්? ප්‍ර: වසන්ත. උ: කාටද ැන්මන්? ප්‍ර: එයාමේ මනෝනට.” (vide page 237 of the Appeal Brief)

37. Furthermore, PW1 testified in several occasions that it was the Appellant who had

coached him to give false account of the incident. This substantially undermine the

Appellant’s contention that PW2 had influenced or coached PW1 to give evidence

against him, rendering that assertion highly questionable.

“………. ප්‍ර: දැන් සාක්ිකරු දීපු ප්‍රකාශයක තිමයනවා නේ තාත්තා ඔරුව ඇදමෙන මොඩට එන්න ආව කියල එමහම ප්‍රකාශ කලද?

CA/HCC/0081/2023

12 | P a g e

උ: එමහම ඉතින් කිව්මව් තාත්තා මට කියන්න කියපු නිසා.” (vide page 192 of the Appeal Brief) 38. In advance, the Appellant contented that the Learned Trial Judge failed to properly

analyze the evidence of PW8. It is noteworthy that PW8, retired Police Officer

attached to the Iginiyagala Police station, testified that investigation did not reveal

any evidence to suggest that the canoe had overturned and then the deceased had

drowned as a result of such an occurrence. Therefore, it is evident that the Learned

High Court Judge has properly analyzed the testimony of PW8.

“ප්‍ර: ඔරුව මපරලුනා කියන කරණය සේ න්දමයන් විමර්ශනමේදී අනාවරණය වුනාද? උ: නැත ස්වාමිනි. ප්‍ර: අනාවරණය වුමන්? උ: නැහැ ස්වාමිනි.” (vide page 257 of the Appeal Brief)

39. The Appellant further contended that the Learned High Court Judge has failed to

appreciate that the documents marked P1X, P1Y, and P1C had not been made

voluntarily by PW1. However, evidence clearly establishes otherwise, as PW1 himself

testified that it was he who made the arts marked as P1X, P1Y, and P1C without any

influence from any person.

“ප්‍ර: ඒ ිත්‍ර මසනුර ඇන්දා කියල කිව්වා මන්ද? උ: ඔව්. ප්‍ර: දැන් මේ මසනුර ඒ ිත්‍ර අදින්න කව්රුහරි කියල දුන්නද? උ: නැහැ. ප්‍ර: මකාමහාමද ඒ ිත්‍ර මසනුර ඇන්මද්ධ? උ: තනිමයන්.” (vide page 189 of the Appeal Brief)

CA/HCC/0081/2023

13 | P a g e

40. This position is further corroborated by the testimony of PW11, WPC Kanchana

Wijesinghe, who confirmed that PW1 himself drew the said arts. Her testimony is

as follows;

“ප්‍ර: ඒ පින්ුර ඇන්මද්ධ දරුවා ඔ මේ ඉස්සරහද? උ: එමහමයි. ………. ප්‍ර: මේ දරුවා මමාන විදියටද ඒ පින්ුර ඇන්මද්ධ? කාමේ හරි මෙ මපන්ීමක් තිබ් ද? උ: එමහම නැහැ ෙරු උුමාණනි. දරුවා විසින් තමයි ස්ුල් එකක තියාමෙන හාෆ්ශිට් එක උපමයෝගී කරමෙන දරුවා විසින් තමයි ඇන්මද්ධ.” (vide page 289 of the Appeal Brief) 41. I shall now consider the final ground of appeal advanced by the Appellant that the

Learned High Court Judge failed to consider the evidence of the Appellant in its

proper perspective.

42. According to the testimony of the Appellant, the deceased met with her death when

the canoe allegedly overturned due to strong wind and waves while they were

sailing in the said tank. Furthermore, the Appellant testified that he was in a state

of shock following the incident and, as a result, had no recollection of his action

thereafter.

43. However, it is noteworthy that, if the canoe had in fact overturned accidentally, as

alleged by the Appellant, his subsequent conduct is wholly inconsistent with that

of a reasonable and prudent person. Evidently, there were two or three houses

situated in close proximity to the tank, and it would have been possible for the

Appellant to raise alarm and seek assistance to rescue or search for the deceased.

No evidence was adduced to show that the Appellant made any attempt to save the

deceased. This renders the Appellant’s subsequent conduct highly impalpable.

CA/HCC/0081/2023

14 | P a g e

44. Furthermore, the Learned High Court Judge has paid adequate attention to the

evidence of the Appellant and has evaluated it in its proper judicial perspective.

More importantly, the conclusion reached by the Learned High Court Judge that

the Appellant acted with the murderous intention to cause death of the deceased

by striking his wife with the canoe paddle while in the said tank, after she fell into

the tank, and by further pushing her down with the paddle as she clung to the canoe

in an attempt to save her life. Therefore, I find no basis to disagree with the

findings of the Learned Trial Judge. Accordingly, the conviction and sentence

imposed on the Appellant by the Learned High Court Judge are hereby affirmed.

45. The appeal is accordingly dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J I agree,

Judge of the Court of Appeal