==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/219/2023

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979, read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: Mannapperuma Mudiyanselage Susil

CA/HCC/0219/2023 Bandara alias Gamini

High Court of Puttalam Case No. HC/90/2019

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

CA/HCC/219/2023

2 | P a g e

COUNSEL : Radha Kuruwitabandara for the Appellant.

Suharshi Herath, DSG for the

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 10/06/2026

DECIDED ON : 31/08/2026 *******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted by the Attorney General for committing the murder

of Meragalpedi Durayalage Thushari Kanchana Weerasinghe which is an

offence punishable under Section 296 of the Penal Code. The date of incident

is 22.07.2015.

As the Appellant opted for a non-jury trial, the trial commenced before a

judge and the prosecution had led thirteen witnesses and marked

productions P1- P2 and closed the case. The Learned High Court Judge

having been satisfied that the evidence presented by the prosecution

warrants a case to answer, called for the defence and explained the rights of

the accused.

CA/HCC/219/2023

3 | P a g e

The Appellant opting to make a dock statement, made a lengthy statement

from the dock and closed his case. Having considered the evidence presented

by both parties, the Learned High Court Judge had convicted the Appellant

as charged and sentenced him to death on 25.09.2023.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and the sentence, the Appellant

had preferred this appeal to this Court. The Appellant had given consent to

argue in his absence. At the time of argument, he was connected via the

Zoom platform from the prison.

The background of the case albeit briefly is as follows:

The Appellant is the husband of the deceased. After a successful marriage

both lived happily and was blessed with two children. About 12 years after

their marriage, the couple separated and lived separately. The male child

lived with the Appellant at the Appellant’s parent’s house while the female

child lived with the deceased. As the Appellant wanted to reunite with his

wife, he sought the assistance from PW07, who was a friend of the Appellant.

On the day of the incident, the Appellant and PW7 had gone in a three-

wheeler driven by PW6, and had waited at a bus halt until the arrival of the

deceased. When the deceased arrived at the bus halt, PW6 had talked about

the Appellant’s intention of reunification and they had all gotten into the

three-wheeler and gone to the Appellant’s parent’s house for discussion. PW7

got off before they reached the Appellant’s parent’s house.

PW1, Irangani is the sister of the Appellant who came to her parent’s house

to look after her father, who was bedridden at that time. The Appellant had

expressed his intention of reuniting with his wife and discussed seeking a

job in Colombo for the betterment of his children. According to her, the

Appellant was calm, and had showed no anger or hostility towards his wife.

On a previous occasion as well, the duo had started to live in her parent’s

house.

CA/HCC/219/2023

4 | P a g e

The Appellant had arrived at his parent’s house at about 5.15pm with the

deceased. According to PW1, she had not noticed anything being carried by

the Appellant. At that time, the Appellant was calm and quiet and had not

shown any anger. At that time, the witness had seen the son of the Appellant

making a face and she had walked towards the kitchen. Immediately, she

had heard the altercation between the Appellant and the deceased and she

had seen the deceased on the ground.

PW6 Karunaratne and PW7 Sunil Shantha had also observed that the

Appellant was very calm and quiet when he met the deceased. Even after

getting into the three-wheeler, the Appellant had spoken gently with the

deceased. According to the witnesses the Appellant had not shown any anger

towards the deceased.

According to PW4, Indrani, a neighbour of the Appellant, after the arrival of

the three-wheeler she had heard no altercation or verbal exchange between

the Appellant and the deceased. However, she had heard the deceased telling

the Appellant not to disturb her and two children.

According to PW16, JMO Ajith Jayasena, the deceased had suffered only one

fatal stab injury which has resulted the death, whereas the rest of the

injuries are minor and surface cut injuries which also can be categorised as

defensive injuries.

According to PW9, the investigating officer, he had arrested the Appellant at

his partly constructed house. At the time of arrest, as the Appellant seemed

to have consumed liquor, steps had been taken to hospitalise the Appellant.

The learned Counsel for the Appellant had raised following grounds appeal

on behalf of the Appellant:

1. That the Learned Trial Judge has failed to consider the reliability

of the main prosecution witness- PW1 and considering her as an

eye witness.

CA/HCC/219/2023

5 | P a g e

2. That the Learned Trial Judge has failed to evaluate the role that

eye witness PW2’s testimony would have played.

3. That the Learned Trial Judge has erred in law in deciding that the

prosecution case was proved beyond reasonable doubt.

4. That the Conviction and sentence are not safe to stand.

During the argument, the learned Counsel for the Appellant drew to the

attention of the Court that as the evidence transpired a sudden fight

happened between the Appellant and the deceased, this is an appropriate

case to be considered under the 4th exception to Section 294 of the Penal

Code. Elaborating further, the learned Counsel for the Appellant also drew

to our attention that the evidence led by the prosecution did not reveal that

the Appellant had a premeditated plan to kill his deceased wife. According to

the witnesses, PW6, PW7 and PW1, the Appellant was calm, quiet, and had

expressed no anger when he came with the deceased to his parent’s house.

The learned Deputy Solicitor General, endorsing the submission made by the

learned Counsel for the Appellant, stated that he too agrees with the learned

Counsel for the Appellant that this is an appropriate case to be decided under

4th exception to Section 294 of the Penal Code.

The exception 4 to Section 294 (Murder) of the Penal Code states as

follows:

“Culpable homicide is not murder if it is committed without

premeditation in a sudden fight in the heat of passion upon a sudden

quarrel, and without the offender having taken undue advantage or

acted in a cruel or unusual manner”.

Explanation: - It is immaterial in such cases which party offers the

provocation or commits the first assault.

CA/HCC/219/2023

6 | P a g e

Section 297 of the Penal Code states as follows:

Whoever commits culpable homicide not amounting to murder shall be

punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may

extend to twenty years, and shall also be liable to fine, if the act by which

the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or of causing

such bodily injury as is likely to cause death;

or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may

extend to ten years, or with fine, or with both, if the act is done with

the knowledge that it is likely to cause death, but without any intention

to cause death, or to cause such bodily injury as is likely to cause

death.

In this case the Learned High Court Judge had not considered whether the

evidence given by the prosecution witnesses fall under the second limb of

Section 297 of the Penal Code.

In the case of Gurudeniya Lekamgedara Nishantha Bandara v. Hon. The

Attorney General, S.C. Appeal No. 62/2008, (Decided on October 12, 2011)

it was held:

“A sudden fight cannot be premeditated as the word ‘sudden’ clearly

means that there cannot be any such pre-arrangements. It should also be

noted that the lapse of time between the initial argument and the final fight

is material for an accused to come within Exception 4, since the lapse of

time may grant the opportunity for an accused to premeditate and make

arguments for a fight. Such a fight is not spontaneous and therefore cannot

be regarded as one that could be described as sudden. If there is lapse of

time between incidents prior to the final assault, it is quite clear that the

heat of passion upon the quarrel would have subsided and the death on

such an instance would be regarded as murder.”

CA/HCC/219/2023

7 | P a g e

In the case of Palamura Hewage Harishchandra Kumarasinghe v.

Attorney General (CA HCC 0070/2023) it was identified that:

“Our Courts have considered that to qualify under Exception 4 to Section

294 of the Penal Code, the Accused has to establish that the incident was

committed without premeditation in a sudden fight in the heat of an

argument.

C. Ananda Grero, Culpable Homicide, Proof and Defences, 1988 at

page 69:

“Gour in the Penal Law of India states: "Pre-meditation may be

established by direct or positive Evidence or by circumstantial evidence.

Evidence of pre-meditation can be furnished by former grudges or

previous threats and expressions of ill-feelings; by acts of preparation to

kill, such as procuring a deadly weapon or selecting a dangerous weapon

in preference to one less dangerous, and by the manner in which the

killing was committed. For example, repeated shots, blows or other acts

of violence are sufficient evidence of meditation."

In the case of Jayasinghe Mudiyanselage Lakshman Jayasinghe v. Hon.

Attorney General (CA HCC 0121/2023) it was held:

“In the course of a sudden fight, when the passions are high, one cannot

expect a person, who is so overwhelmed and involved in the incident to

be rationally inflicting calculated number of injuries. Thus, causing

multiple injuries is quite natural, and is to be expected. In the

circumstances of this incident, the evidence does not show any form of

advantage being taken by the accused or of acting in a cruel manner. It

is just that he had acted so in the heat of passion.”

CA/HCC/219/2023

8 | P a g e

In the case of Farook v Attorney General (2006) 3 SLR 174 it was held

that:

“As regards the attempt to bring the case to one of culpable homicide not

amounting to murder mainly on the basis that there is no intention to

cause death, the intention that is required is to cause the injury in fact

inflicted. If the intended injury is sufficient to cause death in the

ordinary course of nature, the offence is murder;

The injury which caused the death was the one inflicted by the accused.

The sufficiency of the injury was objectively established. The sufficiency

is the high probability of death in the ordinary way of nature and when

this exists and death ensues, and if the causing of the injury is intended,

the offence is murder;

The determinent factor is the intentional injury which must be sufficient

to cause death in the ordinary course of nature, that is to say, if the

probability of death is not so high, the offence does not fall within

murder but within culpable homicide not amounting to murder or

something less”

In this case, the Appellant is the husband of the deceased. As the deceased

had refused to stay with the Appellant, a sudden fight had erupted between

the Appellant and the deceased. Given the sudden nature of the incident, as

no time had lapsed between the fight and the fatal blow, it can be deduced

that there was no premeditation. He had no intention to commit the offence,

but due to sudden fight he had dealt one fatal stab blow on the deceased.

The Appellant was 39 years old and was remanded, and was in remand for

some time before he was granted bail by the High Court.

Considering all the circumstances of this case, I set aside the sentence

imposed on the Appellant and substitute it with the following sentence:

CA/HCC/219/2023

9 | P a g e

I impose a term of 10 years rigorous imprisonment with a fine of Rs.10,000/.

This will carry a default sentence of 06 months simple imprisonment.

As the Appellant is in prison since the date of conviction by the Learned High

Court Judge, I order the sentence imposed by this Court to be operative from

25/09/2023.

Subject to the above variation in the sentence, the appeal is dismissed.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Puttalam along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL