1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA Writ application No: 467/2021

In the matter of an Application for a mandate in the nature of Writs of Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Dr. S.W.M.N.P. Karunarathna,

No.27/13, Adhagalawaththa,

Wellawa Road, Kurunegala.

PETITIONER

-Vs-

1. Rajarata University of Sri Lanka,

Mihinthale.

2. Dr. B.A. Kurunarathne,

Vice-Chancellor.

3. Prof A.M.J.B Adikari,

Dean,

Faculty of Agriculture,

Rajarata University of Sri Lanka.

4. Prof E.M.K.R.B Edirisinge,

Dean,

Faculty of Applied Sciences.

5. Prof W.P Wjewardhna,

Dean,

Faculty of Management Studies.

6. Dr S.D. Pilapitiya

Dean,

Faculty of Medicine & Allied Sciences.

2

7. Prof C. Withanachchi, Dean, Faculty of Social Sciences & Humanities. 8. Dr K.G.P.B. Jayathilake, Dean, Faculty of Technology. 9. Prof T. Mendis, Senate Nominee. 10. Dr R.G.P.T. Jayasooriya, Senate Nominee. 11. Ven P.N.P. Pangnanda Thero, UGC Appointed Council Member. 12. Mr. R.M Wanninayake, UGC Appointed Council Member. 13. Mr. M. Senevirathn, UGC Appointed Council Member. 14. Mr. S.P.K. Gunarthne, UGC Appointed Council Member. 15. Eng P Nanayakkara, UGC Appointed Council Member. 16. Mr. H.M.K Herath, UGC Appointed Council Member. 17. Mr. R.G. Jayasena, UGC Appointed Council Member. 18. Prof W.W.D.A. Gunawardena, UGC Appointed Council Member. 19. Mr. S.S.K. Mohotti, UGC Appointed Council Member.

3

20. Mr. A.G. Karunaratna, UGC Appointed Council Member. 21. Mr. I.R.G.D.J.K Ihalagedara, Head, Department of Humanities,

The 2nd to 21st Respondents of Rajarata University of Sri Lanka, Mihinthale. 22. Prof. K.M.P Kulasekara, 78, Ramasinha Mawatha, Kiribathgoda. 23. Mr. N.C.S Senaka, Deputy Registrar, Rajarata University of Sri Lanka, Mihinthale. 24. Mr. D.M.T.U.K Dissanayake, 192, Koratiya, Ruwanwela, Dabagalla, Monaragala. 25. Mrs. W.A.L.P Dilhara, 312/A. Abey Mawatha, Ihala Walahapitiya, Naththandiya. 26. University Grant Commission, 70, Ward Place, Colombo 7.

RESPONDENTS

4

Before: M. T. Mohammed Laffar, J.

S. U. B. Karalliyadde, J.

Counsel: Uditha Egalahewa, PC with Vishva Vimukthi for the Petitioner.

M. De Alwis, SC for the Respondents.

Written submissions tendered on:

03.10.2023 by the Petitioners

Argued on: 09.08.2023

Decided on: 17.01.2024

S. U. B. Karalliyadde, J.

The Petitioner has been serving as a Cultural Officer in the North Western Provincial

Council since 1999. She obtained her basic degree of Bachelor of Arts specializing in

History with a Second Class (Upper Division) in 1997. In 2008 she was awarded the

degree of Master of Social Science (MSSc) specialising in History. She was awarded

with the Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) in History, in 2017.

Rajarata University of Sri Lanka, the 1st Respondent called for Applications for the

posts of Lecturer (Probationary), Lecturer (Unconfirmed) and Senior Lecturer II, in

History in the Department of Humanities of the faculty of Social Sciences and

Humanities by an open advertisement on 28.04.2019 (P-6). The Petitioner submitted

her Application to all the said posts on 15.05.2019 (P-1 and P-2) and attended an

Interview on 13.12.2020 (P-7, P-8 and P-9). At the Interview, she tendered letters issued

5

by the North Western Provincial Council (marked as P-10(a) and P-10(b)) as proof of

her professional experience and a certificate issued by the Department of English

Language Teaching of Wayamba University (marked as P-11) to prove her competency

in English language. The Petitioner was the only candidate who attended the interview

for the post of Senior Lecture II one of the three candidates for the post of Lecturer

(Unconfirmed) and one of the twenty candidates for the post of Lecturer (Probationary).

She was the only candidate with a PhD in History. The Petitioner was not selected for

any of the above-mentioned posts. The 24th and the 25th Respondents were selected to

the post of Lecturer (Probationary) and no selections were made to the other two posts.

The allegation of the Petitioner is, inter alia, that the Panel consisted of five members

had not awarded marks at the interview to which she is entitled, even though, the Panel

had awarded maximum marks to her for the postgraduate qualifications relevant to the

post of Lecturer (Probationary) no marks were given for her PhD and MSSc for the

posts of Lecturer (Unconfirmed) and Senior Lecturer Grade II. The marking scheme

used by the Interview Panel for the post of Lecturer (Probationary), Lecturer

(Unconfirmed) and Senior Lecturer Grade II are tendered to Court marked as P-3, P-4

and P-5 respectively. The format of the marking scheme for all the posts was the same.

The Petitioner alleges that the condition included in the marking scheme that in the case

of a PhD holder the MS/MA or M Phil degree qualifications will not count when giving

marks is arbitrary, unjustifiable, wrongful, illegal, irrational and contrary to the

established practice of the University and that being the only PhD holder, she was

6

victimized as her post-graduate qualification (MSSc), was completely disregarded

during the selection process. The position of the Petitioner is that since she possesses

an MSSc degree in History, she is entitled to at least 10 marks under the category of

other post-graduate qualifications under the item of No. 1(b)(ii) of the marking

scheme but no marks were given in P-3 for the post of Lecturer (Probationary). Even

though in terms of the University Grants Commission (the UGC) Circular No. 721 (P-

16(a) and P-16(b)) the Interview Panel is duty-bound to award marks for the research

work, the Petitioner alleges that the Interview Panel has not considered the experience

she has for 21 years as a Cultural Officer in conducting research, preserving

inscriptions, Olas, historical sites and building of historical or archaeological

importance, conducting inquiries and participating field visits (vide P-10(a) and P-

10(b)). The Petitioner further allege that even though she took 6 years to complete her

PhD and 5 years to complete the MSSc that fact has not been considered when giving

marks under item No. 2(a) of the marking scheme. The position of the Petitioner is that

even though she is entitled to 20 marks under item No. 2(a) for Senior Lecturer Grade

II and Lecturer (Unconfirmed) and 15 marks for Lecturer (Probationary) no marks have

been given to the Petitioner. The Petitioner also alleges that the Interview Panel has not

considered the material produced by her about her language proficiency and no

sufficient marks have been given for her language skills under item No. 03 of the

marking scheme. Another allegation of the Petitioner is that even though she is entitled

to 2 marks under item No. 1(c) of the marking scheme for Awards for academic

7

excellence scholarships in respect of her attendance for an international program on

Capacity Building for providing Alternative Livelihood Opportunities for the poor,

sponsored by the Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India no marks have

been given to her. It is the position of the Petitioner that having obtained a PhD and

MSSc, with many years of research experience, some marks should have been given

under item No. 3 of the marking scheme. The Petitioner further allege that even though

only five members were in the Interview Panel seven members have signed the final

results of the marking schemes and that fact further establishes that the final results of

the selection process were manipulated, fabricated and influenced to select pre-

determined candidates. The Petitioner alleges that the selection of the 24th and the 25th

Respondents for the post of Lecturer (Probationary) is contrary to the provisions of the

UGC Circular No. 17/2005 dated 03.11.2005 marked as P-18 where it states that,

(ii) where a candidate with a Doctoral Degree applies for the post of Senior Lecturer,

application at the Lecturer (Probationary) level shall not be considered unless

such Senior Lecturer applicant is first evaluated and deemed unsuitable.

The position of the Petitioner is that according to her self-evaluation, she is entitled to

102 marks for the post of Senior Lecturer II and Lecturer (Unconfirmed) and 77 marks

for the post of Lecturer (Probationary) in terms of the UGC Circulars 721, 935, 996,

8/2015 and 7/2018.

8

The position of the Respondents is that the PhD of the Petitioner is on the topic of

Education History and it is not relevant to the syllabus of history in the Department

of Humanities therefore the requirement of a PhD in relevant field cannot be fulfilled

through the PhD awarded to the Petitioner. To substantiate that fact, a true copy of the

syllabus and an affidavit of the Deen of the Faculty of Social Science and Humanities

have been tendered to Court with the statement of objections marked as R-2 and R-3

respectively. The UGC Circular No. 166 which sets out the procedure for appointments

and clause No. 6 of the said Circular has been tendered to Court with the statement of

objections marked as R-4 and R-4(a) respectively to substantiate that position. In

addition, a document issued by the Interview Panel members indicating the facts which

were considered in allocating marks to the Petitioner tendered marked as R6.

Responding to the argument of the Petitioner that under item 2(a) of the marking

scheme for her service of 21 years as a Cultural Officer she should get marks and no

marks have been given. The Respondents have taken up the position that to obtain

marks under item 2(a) of the marking scheme, the applicant should serve or should have

been served in an Institute recognized by the UGC which is involved with academic

and research work and the Cultural Department where she is serving in could not be

recognized as quality of an Institution which is recognized by the UGC. Therefore, the

Respondents argue the Petitioner is not entitled to marks under item 2(a) of the marking

scheme. To substantiate that position UGC Circular No. 18/2016 has been tendered to

Court with the statement of objections marked as R-5. Further, the attention of the Court

9

has been drawn to the fact that under item 1 in the marking scheme marks have been

given for the educational qualifications and the Petitioner has been given 20 marks for

her basic degree. Since it is a special degree in History she has been given 10 marks

and further, considering the course work in MSSc she has been given for her post-

graduation qualifications (MSSc) another 10 marks total of 35 marks which the

Petitioner is entitled. But no marks have been given for her PhD since her PhD does not

relate to the subject fields of vacancies advertised by the University.

No marks have been given to the Portioner under item 1(c) of the marking scheme. The

position of the Respondents is that under item 1(c), the Interview Panel has considered

the Awards won by the applicant for academic excellence, Scholarships, Prizes,

Medals, etc. during the undergraduate period and since the Petitioner has not received

any such Awards, she was not entitled to any marks under item 1(c) of the marking

scheme. The Petitioner has been awarded 10 marks which is the full marks an applicant

could score under item 2(b) of the marking scheme.

Under item 3 of the marking scheme marks have been given for the performance of the

applicant at the interview. The Petitioner has been given total marks of 4 under item 3.

The position of the Interview Panel was that the subject knowledge and the quality and

the standard of the presentation of the Petitioner before the Interview Panel was not up

to the standards of the expected standard of a university academic staff member.

10

Under item 3(b), for the extra-curricular activities, the Petitioner has been given 1 mark

for the performances at national level/university level/school level/others/university

colours.

Under item 3(c) no marks have been given to the Petitioner for the reason that even

though the Petitioner had followed language courses, she has failed to impress the

Interview Panel that she can lecture in the English language. Under item 3(e) marks

have been given to the personality, attitudes and subject knowledge of the applicant.

Considering the fact that the subject knowledge of the Petitioner is not up to the

standard expected from a University Lecturer, she has been given only 3 marks.

Two marks have been given to the Petitioner under item 3(d) for the certificates

awarded to the Petitioner in respect of the other professional qualifications of the

Petitioner.

The Interview Panel has considered under item 3(f) the contribution of the Petitioner in

the national and institutional level and since there is no contribution of the Petitioner in

the national and institutional level acceptable to the Interview panel, no marks have

been given. The position of the Respondents is that even though an applicant should

get 90 marks out of 180 marks to be selected for a post of Senior Level II post and 60

marks each out of 150 marks to get selected for a post of Lecturer (Unconfirmed) and

Lecturer (Probationary) the Petitioner has scored only 63, 55 and 55 marks respectively

at the interview.

11

When considering the above-stated facts, the Court can be satisfied that the Petitioner

has been given 20 marks for her basic degree qualification under item 1 of the marking

scheme. The position of the Respondents is that the topic of the PhD of the Petitioner

is not relevant to the syllabus of History in the University and after considering the

course work in the MSSc she was given 10 marks which is the highest mark an applicant

could get for the post-graduation qualifications has been given to the Petitioner. To

substantiate that fact, the syllabus of the History in the university and an affidavit of the

Dean of the Faculty of Social Sciences and Humanities have been tendered to Court

marked as R-2 and R-3 respectively. The Court has no expertise to decide whether the

PhD of the Petitioner is relevant to the posts advertised. According to the Respondents,

the reason for not giving marks to the Petitioner under item 2(a) of the marking scheme

is that the Department in the Provincial Council which the Petitioner has been serving

for 21 years is not recognized by the UGC as an Institution that involved with academic

and research work like a University. Considering the above-stated facts the Court can

accept the reasons given by the Respondents for not giving marks under item 2(a) of

the marking scheme to the Petitioner.

Since the Petitioner had not won scholarships, awards, or medals during the

undergraduate period, no marks have been given to the Petitioner under item 1(b) (ii).

The Petitioner has been given full marks under 2(a) of the marking scheme.

12

Under item 3 marks have been given for the performance at the interview. Under 3(a)

the Petitioner has been given 4 marks out of 40 marks. The Interview Panel concluded

that the communication skills and the subject knowledge of the Petitioner are not that

of the standards of a University lecturer.

Further, no marks have been awarded to the Petitioner under item 3(c) for the reason

that even though the Petitioner had followed English courses, the view of the Interview

Panel had been that she is not confident in lecturing in the English language.

Since the Interview Panel was of the view that the subject knowledge of the Petitioner

is not sufficient, only 3 marks were given to the Petitioner under item 3(c) of the

marking scheme. Further, since there is no contribution of the Petitioner at the national

or Institutional level no marks were given under item 3(d). This Court has no expertise

to consider the marks given by the Interview Panel under item 3 of the marking scheme

based on the performance of the Petitioner at the interview. When the Court has no

expert knowledge about the facts involved in a Writ application, the Court is not

inclined to exercise its Writ jurisdiction.

In the case of Pereira and Nine Others Vs Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri

Lanka and 22 others1, it was held that,

"Those responsible for the achievements of the objects of the institution... would

classify its ancillary staff according to some method or system found on intelligible

1 (1994) 1 SLR 152.

13

differentia.... at whatever level, it would be expected that persons whose services

are engaged in each group or sub-group are, in terms of knowledge skill and

aptitude, suited to the circumstances of employment in each classThe search for

such persons is ordinarily likely to be most successful if there is an opportunity of

choosing from several persons who possess requisite minimum qualities and

qualifications.... the guiding factor is the achievement of the goals of the institution

within the framework of the law.... In the exercise of their discretion, they have

both the right and a duty to discriminate so that the objects of the institution as set

out in the instrument of creation may be achieved; distinctions are regarded as

permissible because they are necessary to select those who are necessary and best

suited for the performance of specific tasks."

In the case of Dr. C.J.A. Jayawardena Vs University of Colombo and 28 Others2,

Arjuna Obeyesekere J. investigated whether academic issues are outside the jurisdiction

of this Court. In delivering his judgement Justice Arjuna Obeyesekere observed the

following:

"The issue that this Court must decide in this application is whether the decision

of the 1st Respondent not to appoint the Petitioner to the post of Associate Professor

/ Professor is illegal, irrational or unreasonable. In considering the above issue,

this Court would first like to lay down the parameters within which Courts have

previously acted when faced with decisions by academic institutions, especially

2 CA (Writ) Application No. 137/2018; CA Minutes of 22 of June 2020.

14

since this is a matter on which a great deal of emphasis has been placed by the

learned Senior State Counsel in resisting this application.

In Administrative Law by Wade and Forsyth3, it has been pointed out that Courts

will be reluctant to enter into "issues of academic or pastoral judgment which the

University was equipped to consider in breadth and in-depth but on which any

judgment of the Courts would be jejune and inappropriate. That undoubtedly

included such questions as what mark or class a student ought to be awarded or

whether an aegrotat was justified."

In Abeysundara Mudiyanselage Sarath Weera Bandara Vs University of Colombo and

others4, having considered several English cases in this regard, this Court held as

follows;

"The consistent judicial opinion, therefore, is that in matters which lie within the

jurisdiction of the educational institutions and their authorities, the Court has to

be slow and circumspect before interfering with any decision taken by them in

connection therewith. Unless a decision is demonstrably illegal, arbitrary and

unconscionable, their province and authority should not be encroached upon. This

is mainly because of the want of judicially manageable standards and the

necessary expertise to assess, scrutinise and judge the merits and/or demerits of

such decisions. Dealing with the scope of interference in matters relating to orders

3 C.F, Forsyth, Administrative Law (11th Edition, Oxford University Press 2014), page 537.

4 CA (Writ) Application No. 844/2010; CA Minutes of 8th June 2018.

15

passed by the authorities of educational institutions, the Courts should normally

be very slow to pass orders in regard thereto and such matters should normally be

left to the decision of the educational authorities."

Observing the aforementioned authorities in the case of Dr. C.J.A. Jayawardena Vs

University of Colombo and 28 Others (supra) Arjuna Obeyesekere J. held that;

"This Court is therefore of the view that while due recognition will be given to the

view of the decision maker, whether the decision relates to academic matters or

otherwise, this Court can, and will, in the exercise of the jurisdiction vested in it

by Article 140 of the Constitution, examine whether the impugned decision of the

1st Respondent is tainted with illegality, irrationality or procedural impropriety.

This Court would however exercise extreme caution if asked to consider, for

example as in this case whether a decision of a selection board or panel to award

less marks than what a petitioner claims is rightfully due, is irrational or

unreasonable."

This Court has no expertise to assess the marks which were given to the Petitioner under

items which the Interview Panel is equipped with expert knowledge. It is the view of

the Court that other than the items of which the Court has no expertise, the Petitioner

has been given marks which she is entitled to under the marking scheme. Furthermore,

the view of the Court is that how the marks are given to the Petitioner is legal, not

arbitrary and not tainted with illegality, irrationality or procedural impropriety.

16

The Petitioner argues that when there were only five members in the Interview Panel

signing of seven members in the final of the marking schemes establishes that the final

results of the selection process were manipulated, fabricated and influenced to select

the pre-determined candidates. Nevertheless, the Petitioner has not explained on what

basis she alleges that the signing of seven members establishes the fact that the final

results of the selection process were manipulated, fabricated and influenced to select

the pre-determined candidates

Under the above-stated circumstances, I hold that the Petitioner has failed to satisfy the

Court that the Writs prayed for in the Petition should be issued. Therefore, the Court

dismisses the Writ Application. No costs ordered.

Application dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

M. T. Mohammed Laffar, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL