==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 13 CA/PHC/0064/2014

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal from the High

Court of the provinces (Eastern Province)

holden in Kalmunai established in terms of

Article 154P of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist of Sri Lanka read with

Rule No 2 of the Court of Appeal (Procedure

for Appeals from High Courts) Rules and

section 11 of Act No. 19 of 1990 of the High

Court (Special Provisions) Act.

Assistant Commissioner,

Department of Agrarian Development,

Ampara.

Applicant

Vs

1. M.Z.M.Munas Kariyappar,

2. M.M.K. Mufaris Kariyappar,

Both of T.C Road,

Sammanthurai.

Respondents

AND BETWEEN

1. M.Z.M.Munas Kariyappar,

2. M.M.K. Mufaris Kariyappar,

C.A. (PHC) No. 0064/2014 P.H.C. Kalmunai No: HC/KA/RV/64/2012 M.C. Sammanthurai No: 2944/PVT/12

Page 2 of 13 CA/PHC/0064/2014

Both of T.C Road,

Sammanthurai.

Respondents-Petitioners

Vs

Assistant Commissioner,

Department of Agrarian Development,

Ampara.

Applicant-Respondent

1. Mohideen Bawa Fousadeen

No.431 A/1, Saly Road, Sammnthurai.

2. Mohiedeen Bawa Abdul Majeed

No.51/A Palavadi Lane,

Sammanthurai-04

3. Mohidean Bawa Abdul Calam,

No. 373 A Noor Junction, 1st Cross Street,

Sammanthurai.

4. The Attorney General,

The Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

Respondents

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. M.Z.M.Munas Kariyappar, (deceased)

Page 3 of 13 CA/PHC/0064/2014

2. M.M.U. Mufaris Kariyappar,

Both of T.C Road, Samanthurai.

Respondents-Petitioners-Appellants

Vs

Assistant Commissioner,

Department of Agrarian Development,

Ampara.

Applicant-Respondent-Respondent

1. Mohideen Bawa Fousadeen,

No.431 A/1, Saly Road, Sammnthurai.

2. Mohiedeen Bawa Abdul Majeed,

No.51/A Palavadi Lane,

Sammanthurai-04.

3. Mohidean Bawa Abdul Calam,

No. 373 A Noor Junction, 1st Cross Street,

Sammanthurai.

4. The Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents -Respondents

Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J.

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Counsel : Arif Sunmueen with S. Thanikumar for the

Page 4 of 13 CA/PHC/0064/2014

Respondents-Petitioners-Appellants.

Rifana Muktar, S.C. for the Applicant-

Respondent-Respondent and 4th

Respondent- Respondent.

1st, 2nd and 3rd Respondents-Respondents

are absent and unrepresented.

Argued on : 23.01.2026

Written Submissions

of the 2nd Respondent

-Petitioner-Appellant

tendered on : Tendered but undated.

Written Submissions

of the Applicant- Respondent-

Respondent and

4th Respondent-Respondent

tendered on : 29.11.2019

Decided on : 22.05.2026

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

The instant appeal arises from an order of the learned High Court Judge of the

Eastern Province holden at Kalmunai dated 17.06.2014 (hereinafter called and

referred to as ‘the HC order’) made in the exercise of the revisionary jurisdiction

vested in him under Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the

Constitution’) whereby, the learned High Court Judge had dismissed an

Page 5 of 13 CA/PHC/0064/2014

application in revision filed before it by the 1st and 2nd Respondents-Petitioners-

Appellants (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the 1st and 2nd Appellants )

against the order of the Learned Magistrate of Sammanthurai dated 09.03.2012

(hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the MC order’), whereby, the Learned

Magistrate of Sammanthurai had in pursuant to a written report presented

thereto by the Applicant-Respondent-Respondent-Assistant Commissioner of

Department of Agrarian Development, Ampara (hereinafter called and referred to

as ‘the Applicant Respondent’) by virtue of the powers vested in him under

section 8(1) to be read with section 7(7) of the Agrarian Development Act No. 46

of 2000 (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Act’) seeking eviction of the 1st

and 2nd Appellants and all those in occupation of the Paddy Land in extent of

approximately, 08 Acres 02 Roods 21 Perches as morefully, shown and depicted

in the said written report presented to the Magistrate Court of Sammanthurai

and to deliver possession thereof to the aggrieved party mentioned in the written

report as the person to whom delivery of possession thereof, should be made,

directed the Fiscal to forthwith evict the 1st and 2nd Appellants and all those in

occupation and to deliver possession thereof, to the aggrieved party mentioned

in the written report.

It is to be noted that during the pendency of the instant appeal before us, the 1st

Appellant had passed away and the 2nd Appellant had in his affidavit dated

21.09.2020 furnished to this Court along with the motion dated 22.09.2020,

notified to Court that the appeal will be proceeded by him notwithstanding the

death of the 1st Appellant who being his father by reason of the fact that the land

in dispute had been transferred to him by his father during his life time in the

manner as stated in his affidavit.

The dismissal of the application in revision filed by the 1st and 2nd Appellants

before the High Court of Eastern Province holden at Kalmunai impugning the

MC order is mainly, based on the findings of the learned High Court Judge of

Kalmunai that MC order contains no illegality or procedural impropriety. It is

this order that the 1st and 2nd Appellants now, sought in the instant appeal to

Page 6 of 13 CA/PHC/0064/2014

impugn before us on the grounds of appeal urged by them in paragraph 29

(a),(b),(c),(d),(e),(f) and (g) of the petition of appeal and they may be reproduced

verbatim the same as follows;

“a. The said judgment dated 17.06.2014 of the Provincial High Court of

Kalmunai is contrary to law and against the weight of evidence;

b. The learned Provincial High Court Judge erred by failing to consider

that the Commissioner-General could order eviction only as provided by

the Act, that is;

The Act grants the power to the Commissioner General or the Assistant

Commissioner read together with Section 38 of the Act to order eviction

under Section 7(7) (b)ll which provides as follows.

"(ii) The Commissioner-General shall on receipt of the decision of the

Agrarian Tribunal or the Court of Appeal, as the case may be, in writing

order that every person in occupation of the extent of paddy land shall

vacate it on or before such date as shall be specified in such order and if

such person fails to comply with such order, he shall be evicted from such

extent in accordance with the provisions of Section 8: and"

In the circumstances for the Commissioner to order eviction under Section

7(7)(b)ll there has to be an order by the Agrarian Tribunal or the Court of

Appeal as the case may be. There is no other provision under the Act

granting the power to the Commissioner General to order eviction.

c. The learned Provincial High Court Judge erred by failing to consider that

an inquiry by the Agrarian Tribunal has to be commenced and held as

provided in Section 7(3), 7(4), 7(5), 7(6) of the said Act. These subsections

deal with the unlawful eviction of a purported tenant cultivator.

Page 7 of 13 CA/PHC/0064/2014

d. The learned Judge of the Provincial High Court erred by failing to

consider that the purported inquiry was conducted under 7(14) of the Act

which provides for as follows:

7.14 "If any person directly or indirectly makes use of, or threatens to make

use of, force, violence or restraint, or inflicts or threatens to inflict, any

harm, damage or loss upon or against a tenant cultivator of any extent of

paddy land in order to induce, compel or prevail upon that tenant

cultivator to refrain from exercising and right or privilege conferred upon

him by or under this Act, such person shall be deemed to interfere in the

occupation and use of such extent by that tenant cultivator".

Therefore the purported order for eviction made in terms of Section 8(1) of

the said the Act, cannot be based on Section 7 (14) as set out in the

application filed by the Assistant Commissioner.

e. The learned Provincial High Court Judge failed to consider that further

to Section 7 (14) the Assistant Commissioner is only entitled to prosecute

the Appellants under Section 7(15) of the Act which provides as follows;

"Any person who contravenes the provisions of this section shall be guilty

of an offence under this Act, and shall on conviction after summary trail

before a Magistrate be liable to a fine not exceeding five thousand rupees".

In fact the Assistant Commissioner prosecuted the Appellants under the

above section by filing reports in the Magistrate's Court, Kalmunai in style

and numbers 55338/PR/09, 55339/PR/09, 55340/PR/09 in which

actions the Appellants were acquitted (vide P11, P12 and P13). No appeals

were preferred against the said acquittals.

Page 8 of 13 CA/PHC/0064/2014

f. In any event the learned Judge of the Provincial High Court erred by

failing to consider that the provisions of the said Act only permit the

Commissioner General to evict the landlord from the impugned land and

if it is the position of the Applicant-Respondent-Respondent that the

Respondents-Petitioners-Appellants are not the landlords of the purported

tenant cultivators, then the Commissioner General does not have power to

evict the Respondents-Petitioners-Appellants.

g. The learned Judge of the Provincial High Court erred by holding that the

Appellants have failed to set out exceptional circumstances warranting the

exercise of the revisionary jurisdiction of the Provincial High Court.”

In addition, the following two grounds of appeal were also urged by the 1st and

2nd Appellants in their petition of appeal;

“1. Does Commissioner has authority to order to vacate the paddy land in

an inquiry conducted under section 7(14) of the Agrarian Development Act

No: 46 of 2000?

2. Does the commissioner has authority to file report under section 8(1) of

the Act to Magistrates court in an inquiry conducted under 7(14) of the

Agrarian Development Act No. 46 of 2000?”

This case has a chequered history. As is discernible from the record, the 1st

Appellant now deceased, had by the Deed of Transfer bearing No. 1187 dated

04.02.1977, become the owner of the paddy land which is the subject matter of

the instant appeal; and that by a letter dated 28.09.2009, the 2nd to 4th

Respondent-Respondents had brought to the notice of the Applicant-Respondent

that they are the tenant cultivators of the said land; and that they had been

evicted from the said land by the 1st and 2nd Appellants; and that acting on the

said complaint, the Applicant-Respondent had filed action in the Magistrate

Page 9 of 13 CA/PHC/0064/2014

Court of Kalmunai in terms of sections 7(14) and 7(15) of the Act; and that

dissatisfied by the said decision to prosecute the 1st and 2nd Appellants without

conducting an inquiry as provided for by section 7 of the Act, the 1st and 2nd

Appellants had filed a writ application bearing No. 26/2009 in the High Court of

the Eastern Province holden at Kalmunai seeking a Writ of Certiorari to quash

the said decision to prosecute; and that however, while proceedings were pending

before the High Court of Kalmunai, the 1st and 2nd Appellants had agreed to the

Applicant-Respondent holding an inquiry as required by section 7 of the Act; and

that the inquiry was accordingly, held in pursuant to which report dated

23.08.2010 had been prepared by the inquiring officer; and that having

concluded that the 1st and 2nd Appellants were trespassers, the Applicant-

Respondent had proceeded to issue to them an order dated 23.08.2010 directing

them to vacate the Paddy Land in dispute-the subject matter of the instant

appeal by 17.09.2010 and to handover possession of the said Paddy Land to the

2nd to 4th Respondents-Respondents; and that the 1st and 2nd Appellants had

also been informed that steps will be taken in terms of section 8(2) of the Act, if

they do not comply, with the said order; and that even though the learned High

Court Judge of Kalmunai dismissed the aforementioned writ application filed by

the 1st and 2nd Appellants after filing the said inquiry report dated 23.08.2010,

before the learned Magistrate of Kalmunai had proceeded at the end of which the

1st and 2nd Appellants had been acquitted in all three cases instituted under

sections 7(14) and 7(15) of the Act, against them by Applicant-Respondent

bearing Nos. 55338/PR/09, 55339/PR/09 and 55340/PR/09; and that on

08.03.2012 the Applicant-Respondent had filed proceedings acting under the

powers vested in him by section 8(1) of the Act in the Magistrate’s Court of

Sammanthurai seeking an order to evict the 1st and 2nd Appellants from the said

Paddy Land as they had not complied with the aforementioned order dated

23.08.2010; and that the said application having been granted by the learned

Magistrate of Sammanthurai, the 1st and 2nd Appellants being aggrieved thereby,

had invoked the revisionary jurisdiction of the High Court of the Eastern Province

Page 10 of 13 CA/PHC/0064/2014

holden at Kalmunai against such order mainly, on the premise that even though

section 7(3) of the Act requires an inquiry to be held by an Agrarian Tribunal, no

such inquiry had been held and therefore, Applicant-Respondent had no

jurisdiction to present a written report to the Magistrate Court of Sammanthurai

under section 8(1) of the Act and therefore, order of eviction made by the learned

Magistrate of Sammanthurai in the case bearing No. 2944/PVT/12 is ex facie

bad in law and manifestly, erroneous and illegal for the reasons morefully, set

out in paragraph 18 of the petition filed in the High Court of Eastern Province

holden at Kalmunai in the said revision application bearing No. HC/KAL/ RV/

64/12 and therefore, it should be revised and set aside by the High Court of the

Eastern Province acting in revision; and that the learned High Court Judge of

Kalmunai had by his order dated 17.06.2014(HC order), dismissed the

application in revision by holding there had been no illegality or impropriety of

the order of the learned Magistrate of Samanthurai dated 09.03.2012 (MC order);

and that it is the HC order that the 1st and 2nd Appellants seek to canvass before

us in the instant appeal.

The 1st and 2nd Appellants had in their application in revision, sought to impugn

the MC order before the High Court of Eastern Province holden at Kalmunai

mainly, on the premise that;

a) An application by the Commissioner General of Agrarian Development under

Section 8(2) of the Act must be preceded by an Order of an Agrarian Tribunal;

b) The Commissioner General of Agrarian Development cannot conduct an

inquiry in terms of Section 7(4) of the Act relating to an eviction, and that in

terms of Sections 7(3) and 7(7) of the Act, such an inquiry can only be conducted

by an Agrarian Tribunal;

c) No such inquiry has been held by an Agrarian Tribunal, and hence, the

decision dated 23rd August 2010 to take steps in terms of Section 8(1) of the Act

Page 11 of 13 CA/PHC/0064/2014

is ultra vires the powers conferred on the Commissioner General in terms of the

Act.

It was thus, contended by the 1st and 2nd Appellants before the High Court of

Eastern Province holden at Kalmunai that in the light of the above, the learned

Magistrate of Sammanthurai had no jurisdiction to make an order of eviction

under section 8(2) of the Act and therefore, order of eviction made by the learned

Magistrate of Sammanthurai in the case bearing No. 2944/PVT/12 is ex facie

bad in law and manifestly, erroneous and illegal for the reasons morefully, set

out in paragraph 18 of the petition filed in the High Court of Eastern Province

holden at Kalmunai in the said revision application bearing No. HC/KAL/ RV/

64/12 and therefore, it should be revised and set aside by the High Court of the

Eastern Province holden at Kalmunai acting in revision.

It is in this context, it would now, be pertinent to examine section 8 of the Act,

and the part relevant to the instant appeal may be reproduced verbatim the same

as follows;

“(1) Where any person who has been ordered under this Act, by the

Commissioner-General to vacate any extent of agricultural land, fails to

comply with such order, the Commissioner-General or any other person

authorised in that behalf by the Commissioner-General may present to the

Magistrate's Court within whose local jurisdiction such extent wholly or

mainly lies, a written report"

(a) setting out the nature of such order and the person to whom it

was issued, describing the extent of land to which such order

relates;

(b) stating that the person who has been ordered to vacate has failed

to so vacate such extent of land ; and

(c) praying for an order to evict such person and all other persons in

occupation of such extent of land from such extent, and stating the

Page 12 of 13 CA/PHC/0064/2014

name of the person to whom delivery of possession of such extent

should be made.

(2) Where a written report is presented to a Magistrate's Court under

subsection (1), such court shall direct the Fiscal or peace officer to

forthwith evict the person specified in such report and all other persons in

occupation of the extent of agricultural land specified in the order and to

deliver possession of such extent to the person mentioned in such report

as the person to whom delivery of possession of such extent should be

made.”

Upon a careful analysis of section 8(1) and 8(2) of the Act, all together, it becomes

manifest that where a written report is presented to a Magistrate's Court under

subsection (1), such court shall direct the Fiscal or peace officer to forthwith evict

the person specified in such report and all other persons in occupation of the

extent of agricultural land specified in the order and to deliver possession of such

extent to the person mentioned in such report as the person to whom delivery of

possession of such extent should be made.

In the light of section 8(1) and 8(2) of the Act, it clearly, appears that a order of

eviction that may be made by a Magistrate under section 8(2) of the Act in

pursuant to a written report presented to it by the Comississioner of Agrarian

Development is merely, a ministerial act and therefore, section 8 of the Act leaves

no room whatsoever for anyone aggrieved thereby, to question before a

Magistrate Court as to the legality or the proprietary of the order that may be

made by the Comississioner of Agrarian Development under section 7(7) of the

Act directing to vacate the such extent of Paddy Land on or before the date

specified therein in an action instituted in a Magistrate Court by the

Commissioner of Agrarian Development by presenting to it a written report under

Section 8(1) of the Act for; the Magistrate Court is not the proper forum before

which such a challenge may be raised as to the legality or the propriety of an

order that may be made by the Comississioner of Agrarian Development under

Page 13 of 13 CA/PHC/0064/2014

section 7(7) of the Act directing to vacate such extent of Paddy Land on or before

the date specified therein, but, that question as to the legality or the proprietary

of an order that may be made by the Comississioner of Agrarian Development

under section 7(7) of the Act directing to vacate the such extent of Paddy Land

on or before the date specified therein, should be raised in a Court vested with

writ jurisdiction by way of an order in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari as done

by the 1st and 2nd Appellants in the writ application bearing No. CA(Writ)

Application No. 226/2014 filed before this Court which was dismissed by this

Court by its order dated 30.09.2020.

In the light of the law set out above, I cannot see anything illegal or improper in

the MC order as constituting exceptional circumstances warranting the

invocation of the extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction vested in the High Court

of the Eastern Province holden at Kalmunai in revision of the MC order as rightly,

and correctly, held by the learned High Court Judge of the Eastern Province

holden at Kalmunai in the impugned order (HC order).

Hence, I would see no error whatsoever, in the HC order.

I would, therefore, affirm both the HC order and the MC order.

In the result, I would dismiss the appeal with costs fixed at Rs. 50,000/- payable

by the 2nd Appellant to the Applicant-Respondent.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL