==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for mandates

in the nature of Writs of Certiorari,

Mandamus and Prohibition under and in

terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

EXPRESS ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES

(PRIVATE) LIMITED

No. 402,

George R De Silva Mawatha,

Colombo 13.

PETITIONER

VS.

1. LAKMENDRA THENNAKOON

CHAIRMAN

Technical Evaluation Committee

Ministry of Health and Mass Media,

No. 385,

Rev. Baddegama Wimalawansa Thero Mw,

Colombo 10.

2. MUDITHA WIMALASENA

MEMBER

Technical Evaluation Committee

Case No. CA WRIT/ 647/2025

2

Ministry of Health and Mass Media,

No. 385,

Rev. Baddegama Wimalawansa Thero Mw,

Colombo 10.

3. MEMBER

Technical Evaluation Committee

DIRECTOR - FINANCE

Ministry of Health and Mass Media,

No. 385,

Rev. Baddegama Wimalawansa Thero Mw,

Colombo 10.

4. MEMBER

Technical Evaluation Committee

ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER

Department of Labour

No. 41, Kirula Road, Colombo 05.

5. PRIYANTHA MENAKARATHNE

MEMBER

Technical Evaluation Committee

ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER

Nuwara Eliya District General Hospital,

Nuwara Eliya.

1st to 5th Respondents all of whom are

members of the Technical Evaluation

Committee

3

6. SUNIL GALAGAMUWA

CHAIRMAN

Ministry Procurement Committee “E”

Procurement Division

Ministry of Health and Mass Media,

2nd Floor, No. 26,

Sri Sangaraja Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

7. VIJAYA KUMAR

MEMBER

Ministry Procurement Committee “E”

Procurement Division

Ministry of Health and Mass Media,

No. 385,

Rev. Baddegama Wimalawansa Thero Mw,

Colombo 10.

6th and 7th Respondents all of whom are

members of the Ministry Procurement

Committee “E” of Ministry of Health and

Mass Media

8. DR. ASELA GUNAWARDENA

DIRECTOR GENERAL OF HEALTH

SERVICES

CHAIRMAN

Ministry Procurement Appeals Committee

E,

Ministry of Health and Mass Media,

No. 385,

4

Rev. Baddegama Wimalawansa Thero Mw,

Colombo 10.

9. DR. ANIL JASINGHE

SECRETARY

Ministry of Health and Mass Media,

No. 385,

Rev. Baddegama Wimalawansa Thero Mw,

Colombo 10.

10. CLEANSY FACILITY MANAGEMENT

SERVICES (PVT) LTD

No. 03, Nandana Gardens,

Yahampath Mawatha,

Maharagama.

RESPONDENTS

Before : Hon. Rohantha Abeysuriya PC, J.(P/CA)

: Hon. K. Priyantha Fernando, J.(CA)

Counsel : M.U.M. Ali Sabry, P.C. with Naamiq Nafath instructed by Ramzi Bacha Associates for the Petitioner. Nigel Bartholomeuz for the 10th Respondent. Chaya Sri Nammuni, D.S.G. for the State. Written Submissions on : 25.11.2025 for the 10th Respondent 02.12.2025 for the Petitioner

5

Supported on : 11.09.2025 & 21.10.2025 Decided on : 09.12.2025

K. Priyantha Fernando, J.(CA)

The Petitioner has filed the Petition dated 11.06.2025 seeking Writs, inter alia

Certiorari to quash the decision to reject the Petitioner’s bid and award the

tender to the 10th Respondent, and a Writ of Mandamus directing the 1st to 9th

Respondents to award the tender to the Petitioner. Interim relief was sought to

stay the decision and the Letter of Award in favour of the 10th Respondent.

The Petitioner Company, Express Environmental Services (Private) Limited, was

a duly registered entity under the Companies Act No. 7 of 2007 in Sri Lanka,

which engaged in the provision of janitorial services across the country,

including to various Ministries, Base Hospitals, and State Universities. The

Petitioner Company was also certified by ISO 9001:2015.

The subject matter of the application is a tender for the provision of Janitorial

and Cleaning Services to District General Hospital, Nuwara Eliya for a period of

one year, bearing BID No. MH/PB/12/CL-E/17/2025. The Petitioner sought to

impugn the failure of the 1st to 9th Respondents to award the bid to the Petitioner,

who was claimed to be the lowest responsive bidder, and the decision to award

the bid to the 10th Respondent.

THE POSITION OF THE PETITIONER:

The Director General of Health Services and Chairman of the Ministry

Procurement Appeals Committee, called for Bids for the said services on or

around February 25, 2025, via a newspaper publication. The advertisement

stipulated conditions, inter alia a prospective bidder should be registered under

the Companies Act No. 07 of 2007, should have provided cleaning and janitorial

services for a period exceeding one year, and should have experience in providing

6

such services to a government/semi-government institute or private hospital for

a minimum of one year.

The Petitioner paid the Bidding Document fee and submitted a duly completed

Bid along with supporting documents and a Bid Security. The Petitioner further

stated that it satisfied the requirements stipulated in the Invitation to Bid and

the Bidding Document. The bid was subsequently opened on March 18, 2025.

The 10th Respondent, Cleansy Facility Management Services (Pvt) Ltd, submitted

a bid for Rs. 96,000,000.00 per year, while the Petitioner submitted a bid for Rs.

96,996,918.00 per year.

The Petitioner subsequently learned that the 10th Respondent was ineligible due

to alleged lack of necessary experience, requisite staff, necessary financial

capacity, and failure to pay EPF, other statutory payments, and due taxes. It was

asserted that the 10th Respondent's bid ought to have been rejected for non-

compliance.

The Petitioner wrote to the 6th Respondent on April 22, 2025, outlining the

ineligibility of the 10th Respondent and the failure to comply with the bid

conditions. Thereafter, the Petitioner was informed by a letter dated April 24,

2025, that the bid was awarded to the 10th Respondent for a total contract value

of Rs. 92,157,864.39/. This letter also provided unsuccessful bidders the

entitlement to appeal against the decision on or before May 9, 2025. The

Petitioner lodged an appeal on May 8, 2025, against the decision to award the

bid, setting out the grounds of appeal and making the required deposit of Rs.

25,000/-. However, the Petitioner had not been informed of the outcome of the

appeal to-date but was reasonably made aware that the appeal had been rejected

and the information was being withheld.

The Petitioner contended that the bid submitted by the 10th Respondent was

non-compliant, contained major deviations, and was thus not responsive. It was

further contended that the TEC and MPC (1st to 9th Respondents) failed to take

into account relevant considerations, failed to follow the terms and conditions in

7

the bid document, and failed to abide by the Procurement Guidelines 2024

(Goods, Works, and Non-Consulting Services) and the corresponding

Procurement Manual, rendering the decision to award the bid to the 10th

Respondent illegal, unlawful, and ultra vires.

The Petitioner specifically alleged that the failure to award the bid to the lowest

responsive bidder, namely the Petitioner, was contrary to the provisions of the

Procurement Guidelines. It was also stated that the Petitioner had been providing

janitorial services to the District General Hospital of Nuwara Eliya for the past

six years, and the services had been extended until June 15, 2025.

THE POSITION OF THE 10TH RESPONDENT:

By filing Limited statement of objections dated 09.07.2025, the 10th Respondent

objected to the issue of Notice and the extension of the temporary status quo

order granted ex parte.

The 10th Respondent raised Preliminary Objections, arguing that there was no

valid application before the Court because the Affidavit supporting the Petition

was sworn by Nambukara Wasam Appuwa Baduge Dinushka Madusanka De

Silva, who falsely claimed to be a Director and the Secretary of the Petitioner

Company. This individual had resigned on August 6, 2024, as evidenced by the

Petitioner’s Form 20 and Form 15. This failure to comply with Rule 3 (1) of the

Court of Appeal Rules 1990 should have led to the dismissal of the application.

The Petitioner was also guilty of laches, having been aware that the tender was

being awarded to the 10th Respondent by at least April 22, 2025 (document X10)

and officially informed by April 24, 2025 (document X11), yet procured

temporary status quo orders on an 'urgent' basis.

It was contended that the Petitioner’s mala fides were evident as the interim relief

resulted in the incumbent Petitioner effectively continuing services without

recourse to the tender process. Furthermore, the Petitioner’s challenge was

8

based on mere supposition in paragraph 14 of the Petition. The 10th Respondent

asserted that the Petitioner was invoking the Court’s jurisdiction mala fide and

for collateral purposes to perpetuate its monopoly of six years. It was argued that

the Petition was abundant with disputed questions of fact. The Petitioner was

also accused of wanton misrepresentation by claiming to be the lowest

responsive bidder when document X9 ex facie showed the 10th Respondent was

the lowest bidder.

The 10th Respondent stated that it was duly incorporated under the Companies

Act No. 7 of 2007 and was currently providing janitorial services to several

governmental and private sector entities, including the Mahaweli Authority of Sri

Lanka and the Postal Headquarters. The 10th Respondent admitted the general

facts regarding the Invitation to Tender for the 19 hospitals and the bid opening

results in paragraph 12 of the Petition, which unequivocally set out that the 10th

Respondent was the lowest most responsive bidder.

The 10th Respondent denied the allegations of ineligibility in paragraph 14 of the

Petition. The 10th Respondent confirmed that it had substantial experience, met

the requirement for approximately 30 employees, employed 35 janitorial

labourers at the Mahaweli Authority, and had furnished a balance confirmation

from the Department of Labour affirming no outstanding dues payable for

Employees' Provident Fund contributions. The 10th Respondent also submitted

letters from several banks indicating the availability of requisite funds and

provided proof of tax payment for the year 2023-2024.

The 10th Respondent was thereafter informed by the relevant authorities to

commence work on May 1, 2025, as it was the lowest bidder, and agreed to a

request to reduce staff salaries.

Following the Petitioner's appeal, the 10th Respondent met with the Director

General of the Ministry, and all queries were duly clarified, leading to the award

in favour of the 10th Respondent being affirmed by the Appeal Committee. The

10th Respondent has been issued an Offer Letter dated June 9, 2025, for Rs.

9

92,157,864.39, awarding the tender for the period June 16, 2025, to June 15,

2026. The 10th Respondent expended substantial monies in preparation,

including increasing the daily wages of employees (from Rs. 1,261 to Rs.

1,600.00 per day) and the monthly salaries of supervisors (from Rs. 41,000 to

Rs. 53,000.00). The Petitioner removed its belongings on June 15, 2025,

discontinuing its services. On June 16, 2025, when the 10th Respondent's officer

arrived to commence operations, certain persons reportedly shouted that "their

Sir had come with a court order and that there was no need for any further

meetings," preventing the commencement of operations.

The 10th Respondent stated that the Petitioner’s bid was flawed inter alia because

certified copies of payment receipts for 12 months over the past three years from

the Employees' Provident Fund were not included, the 2024 audit reports lacked

the required seal, and the ITI Certificates submitted had all expired. The 10th

Respondent prayed that the Court dismiss the Petition in limine with punitive

costs and vacate the interim orders.

IS THE SUPPORTING AFFIDAVIT VALID?

The 10th Respondent submitted that the Petition dated June 11, 2025, was

violative of Rule 3(1)(a) of the Court of Appeal Rules, which mandates that every

application for the exercise of powers under Articles 140 or 141 of the

Constitution must be by way of Petition, together with an affidavit in support of

the averments therein. The person who affirmed the Affidavit, Nambukkara

Wasam Appuwa Baduge Dinushka Madusanka De Silva, was not a Director or

the Secretary of the Petitioner Company as at the date of filing (June 11, 2025).

The absence of a valid affidavit meant the Petition was unsupported and ought

to be dismissed in limine. Several judgments were cited to emphasize the

mandatory nature of this rule, including Hatton National Bank PLC v Kodikara

Gedara Seetha Sriyani Kumar and Others [S.C. Appeal 121/2021 decided on 30th

October 2023] , Seylan Bank v Christobel Daniels [CA Revision Application No. CA

10

(PHC) APN 58/2014),decided on 14th December 2016], Vasudeva Nanayakkara v

Hon. Sagala Ratnayaka and Others [C.A. Writ Application No. 370/2019, decided

on 15th September 2027.], and M.H.M. Riyaz v Institution of Engineers and

Others [C.A. Writ 424/2022, decided on 4th April 2024.].

The 10th Respondent argued that the Petitioner perpetrated a fraud on the Court.

On the date of the Petition, the only evidence before the Court was the Petitioner's

Annual Return of 2023 ("X2"), which purported to show the Affirmant,

Nambukkara Wasam Appuwa Baduge Dinushka Madusanka De Silva, as a

director, but he was not a director or Secretary as of June 11, 2025. The

Petitioner was accused of misleading the Court by annexing the old document.

Evidence was presented to show that the Affirmant had resigned as Director and

Secretary on August 6, 2024, as shown in Form 20 ("10-R1") dated November

11, 2024, and was also not listed in Form 15 ("10R-1(a)") filed on May 26, 2025.

The 10th Respondent alleged that when this infirmity was raised, the Petitioner

engaged in a "deceptive conduct" by producing purported resignations of the

subsequent director and secretary, and a new Form 20 ("X20") dated July 3,

2025 (submitted to the Registrar of Companies on July 4, 2025), claiming the

Affirmant was reappointed on February 10, 2025. The 10th Respondent

highlighted that the mandatory statutory forms for appointment, Form 18 (for

Directors) and Form 19 (for Secretaries), both of which consent to the

appointment, were dated July 3, 2025, and submitted to the Registrar of

Companies only on July 4, 2025, after the invalidity of the Affidavit had been

raised in open Court on July 1, 2025.

It was submitted that the appointment takes effect only upon the lodging of these

duly completed forms. The 10th Respondent argued that the Petitioner's

subsequent submission of backdated forms was a continuation of the fraud

perpetrated on the Court. The Petitioner was also guilty of withholding

documents ("A6" and "A7") that were unfavourable and would have exposed the

deceptive conduct, raising a presumption under Section 114, Illustration (f) of

11

the Evidence Ordinance. The Petitioner's reliance on Section 209 of the

Companies Act No. 7 of 2007 (Acts of a person as a director shall be valid

notwithstanding the fact that the person's appointment was defective) was

submitted to be irrelevant, as Section 209 was an extension of the "indoor

management rule" intended to protect third parties transacting business with the

company, and did not permit a company to circumvent a mandatory requirement

of the Court Rules.

The 10th Respondent cited New Lanka Property (Pvt) Limited v Richard Fredrick

Maurice Andree and Others [C.A. Case No. 171/2000 [F] decided on 10th August

2018] and argued that the Petitioner's fraudulent and disingenuous conduct

disentitled it from any relief whatsoever under the 'clean hands doctrine'.

The Petitioner admitted that Nambukara Wasam Appuwa Baduge Dinushka

Madusanka De Silva had initially resigned as Director and Secretary on August

6, 2024. However, the Petitioner asserted that the said Nambukara Wasam

Appuwa Baduge Dinushka Madusanka De Silva was reappointed as a Director

and Secretary of the Petitioner Company on February 10, 2025.

Furthermore, Ratnayake Mudiyanselage Waranga Lakshan Ratnayake resigned

as a Director on February 10, 2025, and Mahammadaachchi Inshiya Chandimali

resigned as a Secretary on February 10, 2025. The Petitioner claimed to have

duly complied with Rule 3(1) of the Court of Appeal Rules 1990, rendering the

10th Respondent's preliminary objection on this ground untenable.

It is important to note that raising technical objections should be discouraged to

facilitate justice on the merits of cases: in L.H.G. Elias vs Anton Gajasinghe

decided on 28th June 2011, where His Lordship Suresh Chandra J held that

technical objections took up time and added to the backlog.

The objection concerned a delay in informing the Registrar of Companies about

the appointment of the affirmant as a Director, an alleged violation of the twenty-

day period stipulated in Section 223 of the Companies Act No. 07 of 2007. The

12

Petitioner submitted that while a delay in notifying the Registrar constituted an

offense, it did not invalidate the appointment or removal of a director.

Furthermore, the acts and decisions of a director were valid despite any later-

found defect in their appointment or qualification, as noted by Arittha R.

Wickramanayake in Company Law in Sri Lanka (First Ed.).

The Petitioner maintained it had complied with the Court of Appeal Rules. Even

in cases of non-compliance with the relevant Court of Appeal Rules, dismissal

was not warranted, as the Court had discretionary power.

In the case bearing No. SC Appeal No. 11/2024 decided on 08th May 2024, His

Lordship Janak De Silva, J. held that the rule did not require an application to

be dismissed for every failure. His Lordship Laffar, J. in Prasanna Deepal and

others v Western Province Provincial Passenger Transport Authority and others

[CA Writ 137/2019 decided on 02-05-2024] held that the application should

not have been dismissed because the supporting affidavit was defective, as

technical objections should not be encouraged, and the defect was curable.

For the foregoing reasons, the preliminary objection is devoid of merit and

technicalities must not impede justice.

IS THE PETITIONER GUILTY OF LACHES?

Regarding the allegation of laches, the Petitioner admitted that it was informed

by letter dated April 24, 2025, that the bid was awarded to the 10th Respondent,

and that the letter notified unsuccessful bidders of their right to appeal on or

before May 9, 2025. The Petitioner submitted an appeal on May 8, 2025,

accordingly. The Petitioner stated that it awaited a response, but the

Procurement Appeals Committee failed to notify the Petitioner of the outcome of

the appeal or provide reasons for its rejection, which was considered a violation

of the rules of natural justice. It was due to the lack of notification that the

13

Petitioner was prompted to invoke the jurisdiction of the Court, and therefore,

the Petitioner is not guilty of laches.

The Petitioner further contended that the 10th Respondent had raised a series of

purported preliminary objections to prevent the Court from going into the merits

of the matter. The Petitioner asserted that the 9th Respondent, by letter dated

June 9, 2025 (the Letter of Award), informed the 10th Respondent that the

Procurement Committee had decided to award the tender subject to certain

documents which should have been tendered with the bid document being

submitted. This, the Petitioner argued, evidenced that the 10th Respondent had

not submitted the necessary documents along with the bid document, meaning

the bid was not in conformity with the Bidding document as at the closing date

for submissions of bids. Consequently, the bid submitted by the 10th Respondent

was not responsive, and the 10th Respondent was not entitled to the award of

the Tender. The Petitioner also noted that the 10th Respondent had failed to

furnish the documents submitted along with the original bid and the documents

referred to in the letter dated June 13, 2025 (marked '10R8' to the Statement of

Limited Objections).

THE POSITION OF THE 1st to 9th RESPONDENTS:

The Respondents detailed the procedural steps that were taken in respect of the

tender. Bids for the provision of janitorial services for hospitals and health

institutions, including for District General Hospital Nuwara Eliya, were called

under the National Competitive Bidding Procedure by publishing a notice in all

three languages on February 25, 2025. Two bids were received and opened at

the Bid Opening meeting held on March 18, 2025. The Technical Evaluation

Committee (TEC) evaluated the bids and identified that the 10th Respondent had

submitted the lowest bid, but this was subject to several observations, including:

inability to verify registration for janitorial services, non-submission of contracts

to verify service experience, no proof that 25% of current employees allocated for

14

this contract had been in service under previous contracts, and issues with the

letter of overdraft, Industrial Technology Institute (ITI) certificates for certain

chemicals, proof of income tax payment, and the validity of the VAT exemption

letter. The TEC, having considered these matters, subsequently recommended

the 10th Respondent as the lowest most responsive bidder, subject to the 10th

Respondent complying with all the documentary requirements.

Thereafter, the Ministry Procurement Committee E, meeting on April 11, 2025,

considered the bids and the TEC's recommendation, and decided to award the

contract for the period from June 16, 2025, to June 15, 2026, in favour of the

10th Respondent for a total sum of Rs. 92,157,864.39 (without VAT). This

decision was contingent upon the 10th Respondent submitting proof of

compliance with all observations made by the TEC. This decision was

communicated to the Petitioner by letter dated April 24, 2025.

The Petitioner has preferred an appeal to the Chairman of the Ministry

Procurement Appeal Committee by letter dated May 8, 2025. Upon receipt of the

appeal, the Ministerial Procurement Appeal Committee held a meeting on or

about May 19, 2025, where the Petitioner was represented. The Ministerial

Procurement Appeal Committee subsequently recommended to affirm the

decision of the Procurement Committee, and this recommendation was approved

by the 01st Respondent. The decision to award the contract in favour of the 10th

Respondent was then communicated to the 10th Respondent by letter dated June

9, 2025, subject to the conditions set out in that letter.

The Respondents stated that the 10th Respondent had addressed the initial

observations of the TEC. The 10th Respondent submitted the certificate of

incorporation for the provision of janitorial services. In order to verify service

experience and proof that 25% of current employees allocated for this contract

had been in service under previous contracts, the 10th Respondent submitted

copies of service contracts with the Department of Post and the Mahaweli

Authority. For the overdraft facility, the 10th Respondent submitted an Overdraft

15

facility amounting to Rs 22,365,000/- from Peoples Bank, Homagama branch.

The 10th Respondent also submitted the Tax Identification Certificate and the

payment slip in proof of income tax payment for 2023/2024 (except for April

2024), and a letter of exemption dated March 17, 2025, issued by the

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue for VAT exemption.

The Respondents concluded that the TEC, MPC, and PAC were duly satisfied

that the 10th Respondent was the substantially responsive lowest bidder.

Granting an interim order staying the award of the contract would trigger a crisis

in the Nuwara Eliya Hospital and have severe implications for health and safety.

The Respondents asserted that they had at all times acted fairly, reasonably, and

according to the law. The Respondents prayed that the Court vacate the ex parte

status quo order granted and dismiss the application without notice.

The 10th Respondent also argued that the Petitioner's bid was non-compliant and

contained major deviations identified by the TEC Report ("9R3"). The Petitioner's

entire prayer for relief was predicated on the false premise that it was the 'lowest

responsive bidder'.

In the context where both the Petitioner's and the 10th Respondent's bids were

non-compliant with major deviations, the decision to award the tender was based

on the fact that the 10th Respondent made the lower offer, subject to addressing

the documentary gaps. The 10th Respondent asserted that the Petitioner, having

submitted a non-compliant bid, was not entitled to invoke the jurisdiction of the

Court. Reliance was placed on the judgment Walter Abeysundara v Dr. S. H.

Munasinghe [C.A. Writ Application No. 518/2021, decided on 31st May 2022],

which emphasized that a party claiming relief against an irregularity of another

stakeholder in a judicial review application should come to Court with clean

hands.

16

CONCLUSION:

Regarding the law governing procurement, the compliance with a tender had

to be determined as of the date of bid closure. This principle is supported by

several landmark judgments.

1. In Pamkayu (M) SND BHD (appearing by its Attorney, Hemachandra and

another) Vs. Liyanarachchi, Secretary, Ministry of Transport and Highways

and Another (2001) 1 S.L.R. 118, His Lordship Amerasinghe, J. held that

the award of a tender had to be based on compliance with the terms and

conditions of the tender documents on the date and at the time

specified for closing, and an offer that did not comply had to be

rejected.

2. The importance of strict observance of procurement guidelines was

emphasized in Smithkline Beecham Biologicals S.A. and Another v. State

Pharmaceutical Corporation of Sri Lanka and others [1997] 3 SLR 20, which

held that the State and its agencies were bound to rigorously and

scrupulously observe laid-down procedures, otherwise their actions

were subject to invalidation.

3. Chief Justice Sripavan in Noble Resources International Private Limited v

Hon Ranjith Siyamabalapitiya and Others [SC FR No. 394/2015 decided

on 24th June 2016] held that neither the State nor the Procurement

Committee was to act contrary to the Bid Documents and Government

Procurement Guidelines, and that full and strict compliance with all

necessary safeguards was of utmost importance, with any departure

making the evaluation process void.

4. The same judgment cited Pamkayu (M) SND BHD (appearing by its

Attorney, Hemachandra and another) Vs. Liyanarachchi, Secretary,

Ministry of Transport and Highways and Another (2001) 1 S.L.R. 118 with

approval, noting that the failure to submit a required certificate was a valid

ground for bid rejection, reinforcing that the underlying principle was

compliance with terms and conditions at the time specified for bid

17

closing. Judicial precedents clearly highlighted the standard of strict

compliance with procurement guidelines.

It was petitioner’s position that the bid submitted by the 10th Respondent was

non-compliant and ought to have been rejected. The First to Ninth Respondents

had conceded in their Limited Statement of Objections that the 10th Respondent

failed to produce certain documents with its bid, but the tender was awarded

subject to subsequent compliance.

The Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC) had observed eight discrepancies in

the 10th Respondent's bid, including the inability to verify registration for

janitorial services, non-submission of contracts to verify service experience, no

proof regarding the service tenure of allocated employees, and the letter of

overdraft not fulfilling the threshold limit. The 10th Respondent's bid had five

major deviations and three minor deviations. The 10th Respondent had

attempted to rectify these deviations after the bid closure date of March 17, 2025,

in clear violation of the law. For instance, a letter confirming the Overdraft facility

has been issued on June 27, 2025, several months after the closure. According

to the Government Procurement Guidelines, if a bid was incomplete or lacked all

required legitimate documents (Stage Two, Step Zero One), it should have been

rejected and excluded from further consideration.

The TEC ought to have excluded the 10th Respondent's bid at this stage. Despite

these deviations, the TEC proceeded and issued the Letter of Award to the 10th

Respondent subject to the rectification of major deviations after the bid closure.

The 10th Respondent's bid was prima facie non-compliant, there was no valid bid

from the 10th Respondent, and the decision to award the bid was bad in law,

contrary to the Procurement Guidelines and the principles set forth by apex

Courts. The 10th Respondent also failed to submit its bid to the Court despite

having the opportunity to do so, leading the Petitioner to submit that an adverse

inference should be drawn in terms of Section 114 (f) of the Evidence Ordinance.

18

The Petitioner submitted that its own bid was compliant. The First to Ninth

Respondents made no comment or observation of any deviation on the part of

the Petitioner in their Limited Statement of Objections. While the TEC report

purported to identify certain discrepancies in the Petitioner's bid, the Petitioner

contended these purported discrepancies were incorrect and were refuted by the

documents already submitted to the Court. The Petitioner submitted that the

TEC had acted partially and in a biased manner in favour of the 10th Respondent.

For example, the 10th Respondent's Certificate of Incorporation has been

accepted to establish registration for cleaning services, but the Petitioner's

identical Certificate of Incorporation has been rejected for the same purpose.

This conduct seems arbitrary, unreasonable, and violated the principles of

equality and fairness expected in public procurement. Thus, the TEC ought to

have rejected the 10th Respondent's bid and accepted the Petitioner's bid as the

lowest substantially responsive bid.

Based on the submissions made by the learned Counsel and material provided

before this Court, following questions of law can be identified:

(1) WHETHER THE 10TH RESPONDENT’S BID WAS IN COMPLIANCE WITH

THE REQUIREMENTS SET OUT IN THE BID DOCUMENT AS AT THE

CLOSING DATE FOR SUBMISSION OF BIDS?

(2) WHETHER BIDDING DOCUMENT OR THE PROCUREMENT GUIDELINES

PERMIT THE PARTIES TO RECTIFY DEFECTS OR FURNISH

DOCUMENTS AFTER THE CLOSURE OF THE BID?

In the circumstances, this Court takes the view that this matter raises questions

of law that must be assayed and evaluated along with the merits of the

arguments in this application. Therefore, this Court is of the view that the

Petitioner has satisfied the initial threshold requirement which warrants this

Court to issue formal notice of this application on the Respondents.

Having considered the issuance of notice, the question arises whether this Court

can grant interim reliefs that the Petitioner has sought.

19

The Petitioner sought interim orders to stay the decision and Letter of Award in

favour of the 10th Respondent, prevent the 1st to 9th Respondents from acting on

the award, and direct the Respondents to produce various documents, including

the TEC report, the Letter of Award, and the bids of both parties. Regarding the

claim that granting an interim order would trigger a crisis, the Petitioner denied

this averment, stating that the Petitioner was currently providing janitorial

services to the Nuwara Eliya District Hospital, and therefore the issuance of an

interim order would not trigger a crisis as alleged.

The Petitioner further stated that no material whatsoever had been furnished in

proof of the issuance of an interim order causing a crisis, and that the 01st to

09th Respondents had misrepresented facts to the Court. The Petitioner also

stated that the 01st to 09th Respondents and the 10th Respondent had failed to

furnish the documents submitted along with the original bid and had, for

reasons best known to them, decided to withhold the said information from the

Court.

The Petitioner prayed that the Court grant the interim reliefs and the substantive

reliefs sought in the original Petition, along with costs.

The Petitioner is currently providing services at a lower annual contract value of

Rs. 89,753,491.30/-, whereas the 10th Respondent's awarded bid was a higher

amount of Rs. 92,157,864.39/- per year. Therefore, neither the Respondents nor

the State faced loss by allowing the Petitioner to continue providing services.

The principles for granting an interim stay order were set out in Duwearatchi

and Another v. Vincent Perera and Others (1984) 2 SLR 94, considering whether

the final order would be rendered nugatory, where the balance of convenience

lay, and whether irreparable mischief or injury would be caused. The balance of

convenience favoured the Petitioner, as not granting the order would permit the

10th Respondent to benefit from its wrongdoing, and the Petitioner's services

risked termination due to the unlawful conduct.

20

In Preston v Luck (1984) 27 Ch 497, a prima facie case was defined by stating the

Court had to be satisfied that there was a serious question to be tried and that

there was a probability that the Plaintiffs were entitled to relief.

For the aforesaid reasons, since the bid of the 10th Respondent seems non-

compliant with major deviations and the bid submitted by the Petitioner was

compliant and was the lowest substantially responsive bid, a prima facie case

had been presented, and the balance of convenience favours the Petitioner.

Therefore, formal notices are issued on the Respondents, and the Petitioner is

granted the interim reliefs prayed for in prayers (I), (J), (K) and (L) of the petition

dated 11.06.2025.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Hon. Rohantha Abeysuriya PC, J.(P/CA) I agree.

President of the Court of Appeal