==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/CPA/0023/23

Page 1 of 16

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application preferred

under and in terms of Article 138 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Ajith Amarasinghe,

Thebuwanage Awatta, Elawella,

Bellapitiya, Horana.

Petitioner

Vs

1. Horana Urban Council,

Horana.

2. Witharamage Sirisoma,

Chairman,

Horana Urban Council,

Horana.

3. Nelu Nishanthi Iddegoda,

Secretary,

Horana Urban Council,

Horana.

4. Indika Gunawardhana,

Chief Revenue Inspector,

Horana Urban Council,

Horana.

5. Mahawattage Amarawaththi,

No 41/13 B, Hospital Road,

Horana.

Court of Appeal Case No: CPA/0023/23 Panadura High Court Case No: HCW 0002/2022

CA/CPA/0023/23

Page 2 of 16

6. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Horana Urban Council,

Horana.

2. Witharamage Sirisoma,

Chairman,

Horana Urban Council,

Horana.

2.a Badugamage Dona Achini Kisa

Gayanthi,

Secretary,

Horana Urban Council,

Horana.

2.b. A. P. Anil Indika Preamsiri,

Chairman,

Horana Urban Council,

Horana.

Added 2b Petitioner-Respondent

3. Nelu Nishanthi Iddegoda,

Secretary,

Horana Urban Council,

Horana.

3.a Badugamage Dona Achini Kisa

Gayanthi,

CA/CPA/0023/23

Page 3 of 16

Secretary,

Horana Urban Council,

Horana.

4. Indika Gunawardhana,

Chief Revenue Inspector,

Horana Urban Council,

Horana.

Respondent-Petitioners

Vs

Ajith Amarasinghe,

Thumbuwanage watta, Elawella,

Ballapitiya.

Petitioner-Respondent

5. Mahawattage Amarawaththi,

No 41/13 B, Hospital Road,

Horana.

5th Respondent-Respondent

6. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

6th Respondent-Respondent

Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J.

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Counsel : Keerthi Thilakarathna with Chanuka

Ekanayake for the 01st to 04th Respondent-

Petitioners.

CA/CPA/0023/23

Page 4 of 16

Uditha Malalasekera with Angelica

Nanayakkara and Chandika Lakshan

instructed by Saumya Jayasena for the

Petitioner-Respondent.

5th Respondent and 6th Respondent are

both absent and unrepresented.

Jurisdictional objection

raised on : 18.12.2025

Written Submissions

of the 01st to 04th Respondent

-Petitioners tendered on : 27.02.2026

Written Submissions

of the Petitioner-Respondent : 02.02.2026

tendered on

Decided on : 19.06.2026

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Instant application in revision has been preferred to this Court by the 1st to 4th

Respondent-Petitioners (hereinafter called and referred to as “the 1st to 4th

Petitioners”) seeking to revise and set aside the judgement dated 05.01.2023

(hereinafter called and referred to as “the HC Order”) made by the learned High

Court Judge of the Western Province holden at Panadura (hereinafter called and

referred to as “the learned High Court Judge of the Province”) whereby, he had

issued a mandate in the nature of a writ of Certiorari and a writ of Mandamus as

prayed for by the Petitioner-Respondent (hereinafter called and referred to as

CA/CPA/0023/23

Page 5 of 16

“the Respondent”) in prayer ‘ආ’ and ‘ඉ’ respectively, of the amended petition dated

29.09.2022 filed of record.

When this matter came on before us for argument on 18.12.2025, the learned

Counsel for the Respondent had taken up a preliminary objection on jurisdiction

on the premise that this Court has no jurisdiction to entertain the instant

application in revision derived from the judgement made by the learned High

Court Judge of the Province in the exercise of the concurrent writ jurisdiction

vested in it under Article 154P(4)(b) of the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (hereinafter called and referred to as “the

Constitution”) in view of the judicial reasoning of the decision in

SC/Appeal/65/2025 pronounced by the Supreme Court. Then the parties were

permitted to file written submissions on the preliminary objection on jurisdiction

and the written submissions were thus, furnished to this Court by the respective

parties and hence, the order on the preliminary legal objection on jurisdiction on

the strength of the written submission.

The crux of the preliminary objection on jurisdiction is that in view of Article

154P(4)(b) of the Constitution to be read with Article 140 thereof, the Provincial

High Court act as a writ Court, not as a subordinate tribunal, and hence, in the

exercise of the writ jurisdiction, the Provincial High Court and the Court of

Appeal function as concurrent constitutional authority within their respective

territorial competence and therefore, the Provincial High Court in determining

the writ jurisdiction, is original in character, extra-ordinary in nature, and

constitute an exercise of the judicial power of the people within the meaning of

Article 4(C) of the Constitution, but only confined to the matters within the

Province and hence, when exercising writ jurisdiction under Article 154P(4)(b) of

the Constitution, the Provincial High Court functions as a superior Court of

record acting independently, and not as a subordinate tribunal subject to the

supervisory and revisionary control of the Court of Appeal, and therefore, an

order made by the Provincial High Court in the exercise of the concurrent original

writ jurisdiction is not amendable to revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of

CA/CPA/0023/23

Page 6 of 16

Appeal and as such this Court lacks jurisdiction to entertain the instant

application in revision to revise the HC order as such by invoking the extra-

ordinary revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by Article 138 of the Constitution.

On the other hand, it was contended by the learned Counsel for the 1st to 4th

Petitioners in countering the preliminary objection on jurisdiction that in view of

section 11 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of

1990 as amended (hereinafter called and referred to as “the Act”), this Court has

revisionary jurisdiction against the orders made by Provincial High Court under

Article 154P(4)(b) of the Constitution, and as such judicial reasoning of the

Supreme Court decision in SC/Appeal/65/2025 has no application to the

instant application in revision and therefore, the preliminary objection on

jurisdiction should be dismissed in-limine.

In view of the preliminary objection on jurisdiction, the pivotal question that

would first, arise for our consideration is whether the original writ jurisdiction

vested in the High Court of the Province by the Article 154P(4)(b) is concurrent

with the original writ jurisdiction vested in the Court of Appeal by Article 140 of

the Constitution.

It may now, be examined.

The Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution enacted Article 154P(1) to the

Constitution and it reads thus;

“There shall be a High Court for each Province with effect from the date on

which this Chapter comes into force. Each such High Court shall be

designated as the High Court of the relevant Province.”

Article 154P(1) of the Constitution so enacted by the Thirteenth Amendment,

made provisions for the establishment of the High Courts in the provinces.

Article 154P(4)(b) of the Constitution enacted by the Thirteenth Amendment to

the Constitution, reads thus;

CA/CPA/0023/23

Page 7 of 16

“(4) Every such High Court shall have jurisdiction to issue, according to

law –

(b) order in the nature of writs of certiorari, prohibition, procedendo,

mandamus and quo warranto against any person exercising, within

the Province, any power under –

(i) any law; or

(ii) any statutes made by the Provincial Council established

for that Province,

in respect of any matter set out in the Provincial Council List.”

Hence, Article 154P(4)(b) enacted by the 13th Amendment to the Constitution,

conferred upon the High Court so established under Article 154P(1) thereof, the

original writ jurisdiction to issue according to law order in the nature of

writs of certiorari, prohibition, procedendo, mandamus and quo warranto

against any person exercising, within the Province, any power under (i) any

law; or (ii) any statutes made by the Provincial Council established for that

Province, in respect of any matter set out in the Provincial Council List.

[Emphasis is mine]

Section 12 of the Act would in my opinion, be significantly, important in

determining as to whether original writ jurisdiction so vested in the High Court

established by Article 154P(1) of the Constitution as enacted by the 13th

Amendment to the Constitution, is concurrent with the original writ jurisdiction

conferred upon the Court of Appeal by Article 140 of the Constitution, for; it

makes provisions in case where appeal or application in respect of same matter

is filed in the Court of Appeal as well as in the High Court and it reads thus;

“(a) Where any appeal or application is field in the Court of Appeal and an

appeal or application in respect of the same matter has been filed in a High

Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution invoking jurisdiction

vested in that Court by paragraph (3) (b) or (4) of Article 154P of the

CA/CPA/0023/23

Page 8 of 16

Constitution, within the time allowed for the filing of such appeal or

application, and the hearing of such appeal or application by such High

Court has not commenced, the Court of Appeal may proceed to hear and

determine such appeal or application or where it considers it expedient to

do so, direct such High Court to hear and determine such appeal or

application:

Provided, however, that where any appeal or application which is within

the jurisdiction of a High Court established by Article 154P of the

Constitution is filed in the Court of Appeal, the Court of Appeal may if it

considers it expedient to do so, order that such appeal or application be

transferred to such High Court and such High Court shall hear and

determine such appeal or application.

(b) Where the Court of Appeal decides to hear and determine any such

appeal or application, as provided for in paragraph (a), the proceedings

pending in the High Court shall stand removed to the Court of Appeal for

its determination.

(c) No appeal shall lie from the decision of the Court of Appeal under this

section to hear and determine such appeal or application or to transfer it

to a High Court.

(d) Nothing in the preceding provisions of this section shall be read and

construed as empowering the Court of Appeal to direct a High Court

established by Article 154P of the Constitution to hear and determine any

appeal preferred to the Court of Appeal from an order made by such High

Court in the exercise of the jurisdiction conferred on it by paragraph (4) of

Article 154P of the Constitution.” [Emphasis is mine]

A plain reading of Article 138 of the Constitution as amended, Article 154P(1)

and Article 154P(4)(b) in conjunction with section 12 of the Act, makes it

abundantly, clear that both Courts namely; the Court of Appeal as well as

the High Court established by Article 154P(1) of the Constitution which

CA/CPA/0023/23

Page 9 of 16

enacted by the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution, now, enjoy and

exercise concurrent and/or parallel and/or coordinate appellate original

writ jurisdiction on matters referred to both in Articles 138 and 154P(4)(b)

of the Constitution as quoted above which the Court of Appeal otherwise, had

solely, and exclusively, exercised before the Thirteenth Amendment to the

Constitution. [Emphasis is mine]

In the circumstances, I am of the view that the original writ jurisdiction that had

been solely, and exclusively, vested with the Court of Appeal before the

Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution as aforesaid, would after Thirteenth

Amendment to the Constitution, now, be exercised by a High Court established

by Article 154P(1) of the Constitution which enacted by the Thirteenth

Amendment to the Constitution, concurrently or parallel or co-ordinately with

the Court of Appeal subject to the express limitation imposed by Article

154P(4)(b) of the Constitution by itself as enumerated above.

The view taken by me as aforesaid is fortified and well supported by a plethora

of authorities of the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal and they may now,

be examined.

Supreme Court in dealing with the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution

and the Provincial Councils bill, had determined on page 323(In RE Thirteenth

Amendment to the Constitution and the Provincial Councils Bill-1987 [2]

SLR 312) as follows;

“The Bills do not effect any change in the structure of the Courts or judicial

power of the People. The Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal continue

to exercise unimpaired the several jurisdictions vested in them by the

Constitution. There is only one Supreme Court and one Court of Appeal

for the whole Island, unlike in a Federal State. “The 13th Amendment Bill

only seeks to give jurisdictions in respect of writs of Habeas Corpus in

respect of persons illegally detained within the Province and Writs of

Certiorari, Mandamus and Prohibition against any person exercising

CA/CPA/0023/23

Page 10 of 16

within the Province any power under any law or statute made by the

Provincial Council in respect of any matter in the Provincial Council list

and appellate jurisdiction in respect of convictions ‘and sentences by

Magistrate’s Courts and Primary Courts within the Province to the

High Court of the Province, without prejudice to the executing

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal. Vesting of this additional

jurisdiction in the High Court of each Province only brings justice

nearer home to the citizen and reduces delay and cost of ligation. The

power of appointment of Judges of the High Court remains with the

President and the power of nominating them to the several High Courts

remains with the Chief Justice. The appointment, transfer, dismissal

continue to be vested in the Judicial Service Commission. Thus, the centre

continues to be supreme in the judicial area and the Provincial Council

has no control over the judiciary functioning in the Province.” [Emphasis

is mine]

It was inter-alia, held by Supreme Court in Weragama v. Eksath Lanka Wathu

Kamkaru Samithiya and others 1994[1] SLR 329 at pages 296 and 297 that,

“These amendments affected the appellate, revisionary and writ jurisdiction of

the Court of Appeal only in two respects. Firstly, Article 154P (3) (b) conferred

appellate and revisionary jurisdiction (but not writ jurisdiction) in respect of

Magistrate’s Courts and Primary Courts (but not Labour Tribunals, or other

courts and tribunals); this was “notwithstanding anything in Article 138” (and

that Article was in any event “subject to the provisions of the Constitution"), and

so either the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal was pro tanto transferred to the

High Courts or the Court of Appeal and the High Courts had concurrent

jurisdiction. Secondly, Article 154P(4) conferred writ jurisdiction over any

person exercising, within the province, any power under any law or statute

specified therein; this was not stated to be “exclusive”, or “notwithstanding

anything in Articles 140 and 141”, and hence the High Courts had

concurrent jurisdiction with the Court of Appeal…..” [Emphasis is mine]

CA/CPA/0023/23

Page 11 of 16

It was further held at pages 299 and 300 that, “….However, the jurisdiction of

the Court of Appeal under Article 138 is not an entrenched jurisdiction, because

Article 138 provides that it is subject to the provisions “of any law"; hence it was

always constitutionally permissible for that jurisdiction to be reduced or

transferred by ordinary law (of course, to a body entitled to exercise judicial

power)….”

See, also; Nilwala Vidulibala Company (PVT) LTD. v. Kotapola Pradeshiya

Sabha and Others [2005] 1 SLR 296, Kaluarachchige Allen Nona Vs. Sunil

Weerasinghe and Others-CA WRIT 23/2023-Decided on 10.06.2016, T.

Withanarachchi Gunawardana Vs. H. L. Pathmasiri de Silva and Others-CA

WRIT 45/2020-Decided on 26.05.2022

It is in this context, let me examine the precise meaning assigned to the phrase

“concurrent jurisdiction”?.

According to Black’s Law Dictionary-Eleventh Edition at page 1017, the

phrase “concurrent jurisdiction” is defined to mean as follows;

“1. Jurisdiction that might be exercised simultaneously by more than one

court over the same subject matter and within the same territory, a litigant

having the right to choose the court in which to file the action. 2.

Jurisdiction shared by two or more states, esp. over the physical

boundaries (such as rivers or other bodies of water) between them. - Also

termed coordinate jurisdiction; overlapping jurisdiction.”

According to Wharton’s Law Lexicon-Fourteenth Edition at page 228, the said

phrase is defined to mean as follows;

“Concurrent jurisdictions, the jurisdiction of several different tribunals,

both authorized to deal with the same subject-matter at the choice of the

suitor. In equity, the jurisdiction was concurrent where no complete relief

was obtainable at law. It was exercised in order to avoid circuity of action

or multiplicity of suits”

CA/CPA/0023/23

Page 12 of 16

In the light of the definition assigned to the phrase “concurrent jurisdiction” by

law dictionaries as referred to above, “concurrent jurisdiction” means and refers

to jurisdiction that might be exercised simultaneously by more than one court

over the same subject matter and within the same territory, a litigant having the

right to choose the court in which to file the action.

Let me then, examine the primary objective intended to be achieved by conferring

concurrent jurisdiction upon more than one Court over the same subject matter

with a litigant having the right to choose the court in which to file the action. It

is in my opinion, to avoid circuity of action or multiplicity of suits with a view to

preventing a wasteful or unnecessary legal process where a party files multiple,

separate lawsuits to resolve issues that could have been dealt with in a single

action, so that it may avoid waste of judicial resources and unnecessary legal

costs.

In my opinion, the cumulative effect of the provisions of Articles 138, 154P(4)(b)

section 12 of the Act and of the authoritative and biding judicial precedent cited

above taken in conjunction with the definition assigned to the phrase

“concurrent jurisdiction”, is that when the High Court established by Article

154P(1) of the Constitution (enacted by the Thirteenth Amendment to the

Constitution) exercises original writ jurisdiction, it exercises it hitherto

exclusively, vested in the Court of Appeal before the Thirteenth Amendment to

the Constitution and therefore, it exercises concurrent or parallel jurisdiction

with the Court of Appeal; and that, the High Court established by Article 154P(1)

of the Constitution (enacted by the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution)

when it exercises original writ jurisdiction, is not subordinate to the Court of

Appeal for; when concurrent or parallel jurisdiction is conferred by law upon two

Courts, the question of a superior and inferior Court does not arise; and that, as

far as the jurisdiction granted to the two Courts in certain matters goes, they are

equal.

CA/CPA/0023/23

Page 13 of 16

For the reasons stated above, I am inclined to the view so taken by the learned

Counsel for the Petitioner that the High Court established by Article 154P(1) of

the Constitution has concurrent original writ jurisdiction with the Court of

Appeal vested in it by Article 140 of the Constitution.

It is in this context, let me next, examine the legal effect and consequence of

Article 154P(6) of the Constitution enacted by the Thirteenth Amendment

thereto, and section 9(b) of the Act.

Article 154P(6) of the Constitution reads thus;

“(6) subject to the provisions of the Constitution and any law, any

person aggrieved by a final order, judgment or sentence of any such Court,

in the exercise of its jurisdiction under paragraphs (3)(b) or (3)(c) or (4) may

appeal there from to the Court of Appeal in accordance with Article 138.”

[Emphasis is mine]

Hence, Article 154P(6) of the Constitution enacted by Thirteenth Amendment to

the Constitution confers upon any person aggrieved by a final order, judgment

or sentence of any such High Court so established under Article 154P(1) of the

Constitution made in the exercise of its jurisdiction under paragraphs (3)(b) or

(3)(c) or (4) a right of appeal to the Court of Appeal in accordance with Article

138 of the Constitution subject to the provisions of the Constitution.

Nonetheless, no provision was made with regard to the procedure to be followed

in such High Courts. With a view to providing for the lacuna in the law with

regard to the procedure to be followed in the High Court of the Provinces, so

established under Article 154P(1) of the Constitution which enacted by the

Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution, “the Act” was enacted making

provision “regarding the procedure to be followed in, and the right to appeal to,

and from, the High Court established under Article 154P(1) of the Constitution”

and section 9(b) of the Act reads thus;

CA/CPA/0023/23

Page 14 of 16

“a final order, judgment or sentence of a High Court established by Article

154P of the Constitution in the exercise of its jurisdiction conferred on it

by paragraph (3) (a), or (4) of Article 154P of the Constitution may appeal

therefrom to the Court of Appeal.”.

Section 11 of the Act makes provisions for the appeals to the Court of Appeal

from the High Court and section 11(1) thereof, reads thus;

“(1) The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise, subject to the provisions

of this Act or any other law, an appellate jurisdiction for the correction of

all errors in fact or in law which shall be committed by any High Court

established by Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise of its

jurisdiction under paragraph (3) (a), or (4) of Article 154P of the

Constitution and sole and exclusive cognizance by way of appeal, revision

and restitutio in integrum of all causes, suits, actions, prosecutions,

matters and things of which such High Court may have taken cognizance:

Provided that, no judgment, decree or order of any such High Court, shall

be reversed or varied on account of any error, defect, or irregularity which

has not prejudiced the substantial rights of the parties or occasioned a

failure of justice.”

A careful reading of the Article 154P(6) of the Constitution in the light of the

sections 9(b) and 11 of the Act, becomes manifest that appellate jurisdiction has

been conferred upon the Court of Appeal from the judgement made by a High

Court established by the Article 154P(1) of the Constitution in the exercise of its

concurrent original jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154P(4)(b) of the

Constitution.

It is in this light, let me now, examine the section 12(d) of the Act and it reads

thus;

“Nothing in the preceding provisions of this section shall be read and

construed as empowering the Court of Appeal to direct a High Court

CA/CPA/0023/23

Page 15 of 16

established by Article 154P of the Constitution to hear and determine any

appeal preferred to the Court of Appeal from an order made by such High

Court in the exercise of the jurisdiction conferred on it by paragraph (4) of

Article 154P of the Constitution.”

Hence, appellate jurisdiction so conferred upon the Court of Appeal by Article

154P(6) of the Constitution to be read with sections 9(b) and 11 of the Act, from

the judgement made by such High Court established by the Article 154P(1) of

the Constitution in the exercise of its concurrent original jurisdiction vested in

it by Article 154P(4)(b) of the Constitution, has been re-endorsed by section 12(d)

of the Act thereby, exclusively, vesting the Appellate jurisdiction upon the Court

of Appeal from the orders made by such High Court established by Article

154P(1) of the Constitution in the exercise of its concurrent original writ

jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154P(4)(b) of the Constitution.

In view of the above, it clearly, appears that it is only, the concurrent original

writ jurisdiction with the Court of Appeal that has been conferred upon such

High Court established by Article 154P(1) of the Constitution and not the

concurrent appellate jurisdiction which has now, been exclusively, vested with

the Court of Appeal by Article 154P(6) of the Constitution to be read with sections

9(b), 11 and 12(d) of the Act and the resultant position is that the appellate

jurisdiction has not been so conferred upon such High Court established by

Article 154P(1) of the Constitution with the Court of Appeal and hence, appellate

jurisdiction has been so vested exclusively, on the Court of Appeal.

In the result, it is my considered view that the Court of Appeal has been vested

with the revisionary jurisdiction too, conferred upon it by Article 138 of the

Constitution from the orders made by such provincial High Court in the exercise

of its concurrent original jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154P(4)(b) of the

Constitution as a necessary, corollary to the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction

so vested in it, subject however to the accomplishment of pre-requisites

CA/CPA/0023/23

Page 16 of 16

necessary to invoke the extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by

Article 138 of the Constitution.

Hence, I would hold that the preliminary objection on jurisdiction has been

raised by the Respondent on a total misconception and/or misapprehension that

appellate and/or revisionary jurisdiction so exclusively, vested in Court of Appeal

under Article 138 of the Constitution to be read with Article 154P(6) thereof, and

sections 9(b), 11 and 12(d) of the Act too, has been concurrently, vested with the

High Court established by Article 154P(1) of the Constitution in the same manner

as the original writ jurisdiction vested in it with the Court of Appeal as

enumerated above.

In view of the foregoing, I would hold that the preliminary objection on

jurisdiction so raised by the Respondent cannot in any manner, sustain in law

and as such it should be rejected in-limine.

In consequence, I would hold that neither the judicial reasoning in the decision

in SC/APPEAL/65/2025(Supra) nor the authorities cited in the written

submissions by the Respondents are, if I may say so with all due respect, of any

assistance for the resolution of the preliminary objection on jurisdiction so raised

by the Respondent.

Hence, I would proceed to overrule the preliminary objection on jurisdiction

raised by the Respondent with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL