IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

A.K. Jagoda,

Nawala,

N akiyadeniya.

1

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

C.A. Case No: CAlPHC/15612015

PHC Galle Case No:

HC Rev 60/2014

-Vs-

1. Ravi Prasad Kalupahana,

Assistant Agrarian Development

Commissioner,

Agrarian Development Department,

Labudoowa,

Akmeemana.

2. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Applican t-Respondent-Respondent

Before

Counsel

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

&

Mahinda Samayawardhena J.

Nilantha Kumarage for the Respondent-Petitioner-

Appellant.

Awanthi Weerakoon, SC for the Applicant-Respondent-

Respondent.

2

Written Submissions: By the Applicant-Respondent-Respondent on 29/0112019

By the Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant on 31105/2019

Argued on :

Judgment on :

23/05/2019

25/06/2019

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

The 1st Applicant-Respondent, The Commissioner of Agrarian

Development, (Respondent) filed action against the Petitioner-Appellant

(Appellant) in terms of Section 33(3) of the Agrarian Development Act No. 46 of

2000 (Act), in the Magistrate's Court of Galle, for filling a paddy land of

approximate extent of 60 perches, in part of a land extent of 2 Acres, as described

in the schedule attached to the affidavit, in violation of Section 33(1) of the Act,

marked X2. The learned Magistrate by order dated 22/05/2014, issued an order

restraining the Appellant from filling the land described in the said schedule.

3

Being aggrieved by the said order of the learned Magistrate, the Appellant

preferred a revision application to the Provincial High Court of the Southern

Province holden in Galle, seeking to set aside the said order. By order dated

13/0812015, the learned High Court Judge affirmed the said order.

The Appellant is before this Court to have the said orders set aside on the

basis that the,

a) land which the Appellant was occupying is not a paddy land.

b) Appellant is not the owner of the land described in the application filed in

the Magistrate's Court.

When this application was taken up for argument, the learned Counsel for

the Appellant relied on documents marked X5a, X5b, a Surveyor Report marked

V6, the Police Inspection Report at page 147 of the brief and several photographs

together with an affidavit filed by the Appellant in the Magistrate's Court.

According to the schedule to the Application filed in the Magistrate's Court

in terms of Section 33(3) of the Act, the boundaries of the land owned by the

Appellant is given as Beraliyaddara land to the North, Ela margaya to the East Lot.

E ofBeraliyaddara land to the South and Kadjugahaaddara Kumbura to the West.

The Appellant claims ownership of an allotment of land called

Beraliyaddara Kumbura alias Ow ita as shown by Plan No. 594, consisting of

allotments A, Band C marked X5a, an extent of 1 Acre 1 Rood and 18 Perches,

4

which the Appellant contends is not a paddy land but high land adjacent to a

paddy land. According to Plan No. 594, to the North of the said land IS

Beraliyaddakanda and Beraliyaddara Kumbura. The allotment marked B, IS

identified as having rubber trees and allotments A and C are referred to as Owita.

Plan No. 3878, marked X5b, also refers to the said land as Beraliyaddara Kumbura

alias Owita.

According to Plan No. 594, marked X5a, and Plan No. 3878, marked X5b,

the boundaries of the land owned by the Appellant are depicted as

Beraliyaddakanda and Beraliyadde Kumbura to the North, Beraliyaddara Dola to

the East and South and Beraliyaddara Kumbura to the West. According to the

Surveyor Report marked V6, the Appellants land is identified as Beliyaddara

Kumbura alias Ow ita and also confirms the said allotments.

The contention of the Appellant is further supported by the folio of the

Agricultural Land Register marked PI, where the reference to the boundaries of

the land called Beraliyaddara Kumbura in extent of 2 acres is owned by a person

named M.K.H. Muththettuwatta and not the Appellant.

The police inspection report at page 147 of the brief has referred to

Allotment B, in extent of 60 perches as a paddy land uncultivated for a period of

over 20 years. The said report further confirms that allotment A and C are not

paddy lands.

5

In the aforesaid circumstances, it is clear that the Respondent has failed to

correctly identify the land described in the schedule to the application made to the

Magistrates Court to be that of the land owned by the Appellant.

Objecting to this application the learned Counsel for the Respondent

submits that the powers of this Court to question proceedings of an enforcement

Court is limited only to the legality of the enforcement process.

The object of the power of Revision as held in Mariam Beebee v. Seyed

Mohamed 68 NLR 36 is the due administration of justice. "The court will not

hesitate to use its revisionary powers to give relief where a miscarriage of justice

has occurred. " (Somawathie v. Madawala and others (1983) 2 SLR 15)

The learned Magistrate by order dated 22/05/2014, without considering the

Appellants cause against the issue of an interim order has made order under

Section 33(5) of the Act, confirming the said interim order and restraining the

Appellant filling the land on the basis that in terms of Section 33(7), the Court is

not competent to call for any evidence from the Respondent in support of this

application.

Section 33(8) of the Act states,

"If after the inquiry the Magistrate is not satisfied that the person

showing cause has lawful authority to fill the extent of paddy land or

remove any soil therefrom or erect a structure thereon, he shall confirm

the interim order made under subsection (5) restraining such person

and his servants and agents from doing any act in contravention of this

section. "

6

According to the said provision when the person on whom summons has

been issued appears in Court and show cause against issuing of such an order the

Court may proceed forthwith to inquire into the same or may set the case for

inquiry on a later date. (Section 33(6)(b))

In the instant application, it is clear that the Court failed to consider the

Appellants cause challenging the identity of the land described in the schedule to

the said application before issuing the impugned order, which substantially

questions the legality of the enforcement process.

For the above reasons, I set aside the order of the learned Magistrate of

Galle, dated 22/0512014, and the Order of the learned High Court Judge of the

Provincial High Court of Galle dated 13/08/2015.

Appeal allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

I agree.

JUDG.E-eFTHE COURT OF APPEAL