IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Sri Lanka Standards Institution,

No.17, Victoria Place,

Elvitigala Mawatha,

Colombo 8.

Petitioner

CASE NO: CA/WRIT/54/2016

Vs.

1. M.D.C. Amaratunga,

Commissioner General of Labour,

Department of Labour,

7th Floor, Labour Secretariat,

Colombo 05.

1A. R.P. Ananda Wimalaweera,

Commissioner General of Labour,

Department of Labour,

7th Floor, Labour Secretariat,

Colombo 05.

2. H.K.K.A. Jayasundara,

Commissioner of Labour

(Industrial Relations),

Department of Labour,

2

Industrial Relations Division,

7th Floor, Labour Secretariat,

Colombo 05.

2A. K.V. Manoj Priyanka,

Commissioner of Labour

(Industrial Relations),

Department of Labour,

Industrial Relations Division,

7th Floor, Labour Secretariat,

Colombo 05.

3. T. Piyasoma,

Arbitrator,

No.77, Pannipitiya Road,

Battaramulla.

4. Ceylon Federation of Trade

Unions,

No.513 2/1 Elvitigala Mawatha,

Colombo 05.

5. P.A.K. Gomes,

No.27, 3rd Lane,

Rawathawatte

Moratuwa.

6. N.S. Jayasooriya,

No.53/22, Sambuddhi Lane,

Athurugiriya Road, Kottawa,

Pannipitiya.

7. M.D.L. Dissanayake,

Akarangaha,

Badalgama.

3

8. M.V.R. Perera,

No.552, Sinharamulla,

Kelaniya.

9. S.U.W. Rodrigo,

No. 143/4, Pethiyagoda,

Gampaha.

10. G.I. Lalani Lokusuriya,

Galthuduwa,

Gonagalpura,

Induruwa.

11. V.B.P.K. Weerasinghe,

Commissioner of Labour,

Department of Labour,

7th Floor, Labour Secretariat,

Colombo 05.

12. Hon. W.D. John Seneviratna,

Minister of Labour and Trade

Union Relations,

Ministry of Labour and Trade

Union Relations,

2nd Floor, Labour Secretariat,

Colombo 05.

Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

Counsel: Kushan DAlwis P.C., with Prasanna de Silva

for the Petitioner.

4

R. Gooneratne, S.C., for the 1A, 2A, 11th and

12th Respondents.

Shyamal A. Collure with Prabath S.

Amarasinghe for the 5th to 9th Respondents.

Argued on: 16.06.2020

Decided on: 03.07.2020

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The Petitioner filed this application seeking to quash by a writ of

certiorari the arbitral award of the 3rd Respondent Arbitrator

marked P19. By the said award, the Arbitrator directed the

Petitioner to pay a sum of Rs 683,040 each to the 5th, 7th, 8th,

and 9th Respondents and Rs. 752,640 to the 6th Respondent on

the ground that injustice had been caused to the said

Respondent employees by their promotion to the post of

Sampling Officer/Technical Assistant (Executive Grade V)

instead of Scientific and Research Personnel (Executive Grade

VI).

The 5th-9th Respondents had joined the Petitioner Institution as

Technical Assistants (Grade III) and were subsequently

promoted to Sampling Officer/Technical Assistant (Grade II) and

then Sampling Officer/Technical Assistant (Grade I).

The Petitioner concedes in the petition that according to the

1986 salary and recruitment scheme, which was applicable at

the time, the next available promotion for the said Respondents

was Scientific and Research Personnel (Executive Grade VI).

5

However, the Petitioner in paragraph 26 of the petition states as

5th to 10th Respondents did not have the required educational

qualifications of a Special Degree, or a General Degree with a

class, or a General Degree with a Post Graduate qualification, the

5th to 10th Respondents were not eligible for the next available

promotion for the 5th to 10th Respondents as a Scientific and

Research Personnel (Grade VI). The Petitioner reiterates the

same with equal force in paragraphs 46(j)-(l) and 47 of the

petition.

According to the Petitioner, as the 5th-9th Respondents did not

have the necessary qualifications to be promoted to the post of

Scientific and Research Personnel (Executive Grade VI), a new

category was introduced by a scheme of internal promotion and

recruitment in 1997, and it was on this basis the said

Respondents were promoted as Sampling Officer/Technical

Assistant (Executive Grade V). The 5th-9th Respondents state the

said new post was not approved by the line Ministry and the

Department of Management Services, and therefore had no legal

validity.

The said Respondents in their statement of objections point out

the statement contained in paragraph 26 of the petition quoted

above is suppression or misrepresentation of material facts, in

that, according to the 1986 salary and recruitment scheme, the

requirements for the post of Scientific and Research Personnel

(Executive Grade VI) were: (i) a Special Degree, or (ii) a General

Degree with a Class, or (iii) a General Degree with a post

graduate qualification, or (iv) equivalent qualification approved

by the Ministry. The said Respondents further state three years

6

relevant experience as Technical Assistants was considered

equivalent to the National Diploma in Technology (NDT) for

internal candidates with G.C.E. Advanced Level qualifications.

In the said paragraph 26 of the petition, the Petitioner has

deliberately omitted (iv) above (i.e. equivalent qualification

approved by the Ministry), as a qualification for promotion to the

post of Scientific and Research Personnel (Executive Grade VI).

The Respondents say this qualification could have been used to

promote them to the said post.

By paragraph 9(b) of the counter objections, the Petitioner

effectively accepts the allegation of suppression of material facts

by stating:

The qualification for Scientific and Research personnel

(Executive Grade VI) as set out in the New Salaries and

Schemes of Recruitment 1986 were as follows:

i. BSC Special Degree; or

ii. BSC General Degree with class; or

iii. BSC General plus post graduate qualification; or

iv. Equivalent qualification approved by the Ministry

In paragraph 9(c) the Petitioner states The equivalent

qualification mentioned in (iv) above was the National Diploma in

Technology (NDT) or similar qualification. Since the inception of

the Institution it has not been considered that (03) three years of

relevant experience of internal candidates as Technical Assistants

(3 years in Grade III) is equivalent to NDT.

7

In the first place, the Petitioner does not specify or explain what

is meant by similar qualification referred to in 9(c) of the

counter objections quoted above. In my view, the Petitioner is

duty bound to explain this to the Court.

Secondly, learned Counsel for the Respondents, in the written

submission, states the relevant scheme (at page 374 of X)

demonstrates three-years experience in Grade III is equivalent

to NDT in the case of G.C.E. Advanced Level qualified employees

such as the 5th-9th Respondents.

I am of the view equivalent qualification approved by the

Ministry stated in (iv) above, which was omitted in the petition,

is a material fact at the root of the matter.

I am in full agreement with the submission of learned Counsel

for the Respondents that the said failure or omission is a grave

suppression of material fact which the Petitioner ought to have

disclosed when the Petitioner initially presented facts to this

Court to have notice issued on the Respondents.

Further, the said Respondents, in paragraph 21(a) of the

statement of objections, supported by the document marked R,

make an additional revelation that the posts of Scientific and

Research Personnel Grades VI and V were amalgamated to form

a new Grade IV, by an amendment to the 1986 salary and

recruitment scheme in 1989, long before the instant dispute was

referred for arbitration. It is the position of the said

Respondents in the written submission that the said

Respondents were eligible to be appointed to the newly formed

Grade IV position, as they had the requisite equivalent

8

training. The said Respondents state the Petitioner also

suppressed the said amalgamation in the petition.

The Petitioner in paragraph 21 of the counter objections states:

(a) Scientific and Research Personnel Grades VI and V were

amalgamated according to the new consolidated salary

scheme along with the recommendation of the salaries and

Cadres Committee as per their Report No.72 A dated

29/05/1989. This new Grade IV is applicable only to the

Scientific and Research Personnel who were having the

following qualifications.

(i) BSC Special Degree; or

(ii) BSC General Degree with class; or

(iii) BSC General plus post graduate qualification; or

(iv) Equivalent qualification approved by the Ministry with 4

years experience after first degree plus Post graduate

degree or equivalent training.

(b) The 5th to 8th Respondents did not have the above-

mentioned qualifications at that time nor does the 5th to 8th

Respondents have the said qualifications even now.

(c) The 5th to 8th Respondents were not promoted as Scientific

& Research Personnel (Executive Grade IV) because they

did not have the required qualifications for the same.

The position of the Petitioner is the new Grade IV position is

applicable only to Scientific and Research Personnel having the

qualifications mentioned in (a) above, and therefore it is

irrelevant to the Respondents.

9

In my view, the Petitioner ought to have disclosed the said fact

in the petition, as according to (a)(iv) above a candidate having

equivalent qualifications approved by the Ministry with either

four-years experience after the first degree plus a postgraduate

degree or equivalent training is eligible to apply. It appears to

me equivalent qualifications with equivalent training would

have arguably qualified the said Respondents for the new Grade

IV. It may be recalled the position of the 5th-9th Respondents is

they were eligible for promotion to Scientific and Research

Personnel Grade VI due to their experience in the post of

Sampling Officer/Technical Assistant (Grade I).

Writ is a discretionary remedy. The Applicant invoking the

extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court by way of writ is duty

bound to disclose all material facts when he first makes his

application to Court. He shall act with uberrima fides utmost

good faith making full declaration of all material facts.

Suppression or misrepresentation of material facts entitles the

Court to dismiss the writ application in limine without going into

its merits. Once the omitted facts are disclosed by the

Respondent, the Applicant cannot be heard to say he was

unaware of the importance of those facts at the time of filing the

application.

Discussing the discretion of the writ Court to withhold relief,

Wade in Administrative Law (11th Edition) states at 598 An

applicant may lose his claim to relief because his own conduct

has been unmeritorious or unreasonable.

10

Similarly, Sunil Cooray in Administrative Law in Sri Lanka (3rd

Edition) at 973 recognises inter alia suppression/

misrepresentation of material fact as a ground for the Court to

exercise its discretion in refusing relief by way of writ.

In the landmark case of Alponso Appuhamy v. Hettiarachchi

(1973) 77 NLR 131, the Supreme Court, having considered

English authorities on this point in great detail, held:

When an application for a prerogative writ or an injunction

is made, it is the duty of the Petitioner to place before the

Court, before it issues notice in the first instance, a full and

truthful disclosure of all the material facts; the Petitioner

must act with uberrima fides.

The Supreme Court again stressed the importance of full

disclosure at the inception of a writ application in the case of

Moosajees Ltd. v. Eksath Engineru Saha Samanya Kamkaru

Samithiya (1976) 79 NLR 285. Holding against the Petitioner in

the said case, the Court stated at 287-288:

The pleadings in their petition and affidavit do not contain a

full disclosure of the real facts of the case and to say the

least the petitioner has not observed the utmost good faith

and has been guilty of a lack of uberrima fides by a

suppression of material facts in the pleadings. It was

neither fair by this Court nor by his counsel that there was

no full disclosure of material facts.

In Blanca Diamonds (Pvt) Ltd. v. Wilfred Van Els [1997] 1 Sri LR

360, this Court adopted the reasoning of the Supreme Court

11

decisions above in their entirety to dismiss the application for

certiorari in limine.

When a party is seeking discretionary relief from court upon

an application for a writ of certiorari, he enters into a

contractual obligation with the court when he files an

application in the Registry and in terms of that contractual

obligation he is required to disclose uberrima fides and

disclose all material facts fully and frankly to Court. The

Petitioner company has been remiss in its duty/obligation

to court and has failed to comply with that contractual

obligation to court.

In Mowbray Hotels Ltd. V. D.M. Jayaratne [2004] BLR 51, this

Court disallowed the application for certiorari against an order

of the Minister of Agriculture and Lands, made under the Land

Acquisition Act, citing inter alia misrepresentations in the

petition, and stating at 59 The Petitioner has violated this

solemn contract of utmost good faith, which by itself attracts the

sanction of refusal of discretionary relief.

In the more recent case of Fernando v. Commissioner General of

Labour [2009] BLR 74, this Court despite overruling a

preliminary objection of suppression of material fact,

nevertheless reiterated its position on this important point of law

at 79-80:

It is trite law that any person or persons seeking to invoke

the discretionary powers of this Court whether by way of a

writ application or an application in revision, must come to

Court with clean hands. Among other things, this would

12

mean that such person or persons must not suppress or

misrepresent material facts and thereby violate the duty of

utmost good faith or ubberimae fides owed to Court.

In the Supreme Court case of Namunukula Plantations Limited v.

Minister of Lands [2012] 1 Sri LR 365 at 376 it was held:

It is settled law that a person who approaches the Court for

grant of discretionary relief, to which category an

application for certiorari would undoubtedly belong, has to

come with clean hands, and should candidly disclose all

the material facts which have any bearing on the

adjudication of the issues raised in the case. In other

words, he owes a duty of utmost good faith (uberrima fides)

to the court to make a full and complete disclosure of all

material facts and refrain from concealing or suppressing

any material fact within his knowledge or which he could

have known by exercising diligence expected of a person of

ordinary prudence.

The Supreme Court at page 374 further remarked:

If any party invoking the discretionary jurisdiction of a court

of law is found wanting in the discharge of its duty to

disclose all material facts, or is shown to have attempted to

pollute the pure stream of justice, the court not only has the

right but a duty to deny relief to such person.

In Sarath Hulangamuwa v. Siriwardena, Principal, Visakha

Vidyalaya [1986] 1 Sri LR 275, Fonseka v. Lt. General Jagath

Jayasuriya [2011] 2 Sri LR 372, Abee Kuhafa v. The Director

13

General of Customs [2011] 2 BLR 459 the superior Courts

reached similar conclusions.

I take the view this application of the Petitioner shall be

dismissed in limine on suppression of material facts.

Before I part with this Judgment let me also add the following.

The impugned decision was made by the Arbitrator upon the

Minister referring the dispute to be settled by arbitration, under

section 4 of the Industrial Disputes Act. Once so referred, the

Arbitrator in terms of section 17(1) of the said Act is expected to

make a just and equitable order. Upon conclusion of the arbitral

hearing, the Arbitrator can exercise his discretion in making an

award. The Arbitrator is not bound by the rigid rules of law.

For instance, section 36(4) of the Industrial Disputes Act

expressly excludes from arbitral proceedings the applicability of

the Evidence Ordinance, which governs important aspects such

as onus of proof, standard of proof, and relevancy. To put it

differently, the Arbitrator may be sensitive to the spirit of the law

but not the letter of the law.

Section 17(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act reads as follows:

When an industrial dispute has been referred under section

3(1)(d) or section 4(1) to an Arbitrator for settlement by

arbitration, he shall make all such inquiries into the dispute

as he may consider necessary, hear such evidence as may

be tendered by the parties to the dispute, and thereafter

make such award as may appear to him just and equitable.

A labour tribunal shall give priority to the proceedings for

14

the settlement of any industrial dispute that is referred to it

for settlement by arbitration.

In United Engineering Workers Union v. Devanayagam (1967) 69

NLR 289, the Privy Council stated:

The powers and duties of an Arbitrator under the Industrial

Disputes Act, of an Industrial Court and of a Labour

Tribunal on a reference of an industrial dispute are the

same. In relation to an arbitration, the Arbitrator must hear

the evidence tendered by the parties. So must a Labour

Tribunal on a reference. An Industrial Court has to hear

such evidence as it considers necessary. In each case the

award has to be one which appears to the Arbitrator, the

Labour Tribunal or the Industrial Court just and equitable.

No other criterion is laid down. They are given an unfettered

discretion to do what they think is right and fair.

In Asian Hotels and Properties PLC v. Benjamin [2013] 1 Sri LR

407 at 419, Bandaranayake C.J. whilst referring to section 17(1)

of the Industrial Disputes Act stated:

An Arbitrator, who has been empowered to make such

award should do so, as may appear to him just and

equitable. Section 17 of the Industrial Disputes Act, referred

to earlier, clearly had granted an unfettered discretion for

the Arbitrator to mete out just and equitable relief.

In Brown & Company PLC v. Minister of Labour [2011] 1 Sri LR

305 at 316-317, Marsoof J. held:

15

Arbitration under the Industrial Disputes Act is intended to

be even more liberal, informal and flexible than commercial

arbitration, primarily because the Arbitrator is empowered

to make an award which is just and equitable. When an

industrial dispute has been referred under Section 3(1)(d) or

Section 4(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act to an Arbitrator

for settlement by arbitration, Section 17(1) of the said Act

requires such Arbitrator to make all such inquiries into the

dispute as he may consider necessary, hear such evidence

as may be tendered by the parties to the dispute, and

thereafter make such award as may appear to him just and

equitable. In my view, the word make as used in the

said provision, has the effect of throwing the ball in to the

Arbitrators court, so to speak, and requires him to initiate

what inquiries he considers are necessary. The Arbitrator is

not simply called upon to hold an inquiry, where the ball

would be in the court of the parties to the dispute and, it

would be left to them to tender what evidence they consider

necessary requiring the Arbitrator to be just a judge

presiding over the inquiry, the control and progress of which

will be in the hands of the parties themselves or their

Counsel. What the Industrial Disputes Act has done

appears to me to be to substitute in place of the rigid

procedures of the law envisaged by the adversarial

system, a new and more flexible procedure, which is in

keeping with the fashion in which equity in English law

gave relief to the litigants from the rigidity of the common

law. The function of the arbitral power in relation to

industrial disputes is to ascertain and declare what in the

16

opinion of the Arbitrator ought to be the respective rights

and liabilities of the parties as they exist at the moment the

proceedings are instituted. His role is more inquisitorial,

and he has a duty to go in search for the evidence, and he

is not strictly required to follow the provisions of the

Evidence Ordinance in doing so. Just as much as the

procedure before the Arbitrator is not governed by the rigid

provisions of the Evidence Ordinance, the procedure

followed by him need not be fettered by the rigidity of the

law.

In Kalamazoo Industries Ltd v. Minister of Labour and Vocational

Training [1998] 1 Sri LR 235 at 249, F.N.D. Jayasuriya J. also

came to the same conclusion.

However, I must hasten to add the Arbitrators discretion,

similar to the discretion exercisable by all public bodies, is not

unfettered. It is subject to time-tested principles and of course

judicial review.

The instant impugned award of the Arbitrator is in my view

innocent a one-off payment to the 5th-9th Respondents for the

injustice caused to them by denying them their due promotions.

It is clear from the arbitral proceedings there had not been a

proper scheme of promotion in place at the Petitioner

Institution; this is admitted in the testimony of the Petitioners

Assistant Deputy Director (Administration). The employees shall

not be made to suffer for this deficiency. Taking everything

cumulatively, the Arbitrators award is neither unreasonable nor

perverse.

17

I dismiss the application of the Petitioner with costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal