IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

C.A.(Writ)Application No. 95/2014

In the matter of an Application for mandates in the nature of a Writs of Mandamus and Certiorari in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Devi Balasuriya, No.356, Kumaratunga Mawatha, Nupe, Matara

PETITIONER Vs. 1. Hewa Halpage Sumanadasa, Vice Chairman, Mulatiyana Pradeshiya Sabha, Mulatiyana, Matara.

2. Sunil EIIadeniyage, Chairman, Mulatiyana Pradeshiya Sabha, Mulatiyana, Matara.

3. Garusinghe Jayaratne, Secretary, Mulatiyana Pradeshiya Sabha, Mulatiyana, Matara.

3A. K.A. Nirmala Jayawardena, Secretary, Mulatiyana Pradeshiya Sabha, Mulatiyana, Matara.

ADDED 3A RESPONDENT

3AA A H. M. Sriyalatha, Secretary, Mulatiyana Pradeshiya Sabha, Mulatiyana, Matara. ADDED 3AA RESPONDENT

4. Mulatiyana Pradeshiya Sabha, Mulatiyana, Matara.

5. Susantha Attanayake, Divisional Secretary, Mulatiyana Divisional Secretariat, Mulatiyana, Matara.

6. Mrs. E.Ae. Widanagamachi, District Secretary, District Secretariat, Matara.

6A Mr. Pradeep Ratnayake, District Secretary, District Secretariat, Matara. ADDED 6A RESPONDENT.

7. Mr. B. Ranaweera, Additional District Secretary, District Secretariat, Matara.

7 A S.K. WeJlahewa, Additional District Secretary, District Secretariat, Matara. ADDED 7 A RESPONDENT.

2

8. The Southern Provincial Land Commissioner, Fort, Galle.

9. The Road Development Authority, 1st Floor, Sethsiripaya, Battaramulla.

10. DS. Thanthirige, The Chairman, Provincial Road Development Authority, No.19, Lower Dikson Road, Galle.

IDA. A.S. Wijesinghe,

The Chairman, Provincial Road Development Authority, No.19, Lower Dikson Road, Galle. lOA SUBSTITUTED-RESPONDENT

11. W.K. Vipula, Executive Engineer, Road Development Authority, Deniyaya.

12. Hon. Minister of Local Government and Provincial Councils, No.330, Union Place, Colombo 2.

RESPONDENTS.

3

BEFORE

COUNSEL

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

TENDERED ON

DEC ICED ON

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

Sanjeewa Jayawardane P.c. for the

Petitioner.

AM.J. Hemantha for the 1st to 4th

Respondents.

Vikum de Abrew S.D.5.G. with N.Perera

S.c. for the 5th to 9th and 11th Respondents.

05.03.2019 & 08.11.2019 (by the Petitioners)

05.03.2019 (by the 1st to 4th Respondents)

29.03.2019 & 18.10.2019(by the 5th to 9th &

11 th Respondents)

04.09.2020

*************

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The Petitioner, by invocation of the jurisdiction of this Court

conferred under Article 140 of the Constitution, seeks issuance of Writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus, coupled with interim relief

connected to the said Writs against the Respondents.

In seeking the issuance of Writs of Certiorari, the Petitioner seeks

primarily to quash certain portions of multiple Notifications, that are

published by the 1st to 4th Respondents, pursuant to the decisions of the

4th Respondent Mulatiyana Pradeshiya Sabha in Gazette Nos. 1766 (P21),

4

1774(P23), 1789 (P24) and 1733(P22) to the effect of vesting a part of her

land "forming the subject matter of this application as a road belonging to and/or

vesting" in the said Pradeshiya Sabha.

She had prayed further for the issuance of a Writs of Certiorari

quashing the purported vesting of her land forming the subject matter as a

road belonging to or vesting in the 4th Respondent quashing "all underlying

decisions relating to the same, any orders /decisions /recommendations made by

the 1st to 4t11 Respondents and/or anyone or more of them, pertaining to and/or

effecting the Petitioner's land, subsequent to the aforesaid purported decision"

deeming her land as a road vested in and/ or belonging to the Pradeshiya

Sabha under anyone or more of the impugned gazettes as referred to

above.

The Petitioner, in seeking a Writ of Prohibition on the 1st to 4th

Respondents, intends thereby to prevent them from "deeming, treating,

claiming, acquiring, classifying, demarcating, using, permitting" to use her land

as a road vested in or belonging to the Pradeshiya Sabha. In seeking a

Writ of Mandamus on the 1st to 4th Respondents. The Petitioner wants the

Respondents to abide by the order of the District Court in case bearing No.

L 7611 and also compel them to duly complete the concreting of the

Government Road (depicted as Lot No. 605 in plan No. 91/P1.

In describing the sequence of events which led her to seek relief

under public law, it is stated by the Petitioner that she owns a tea

plantation called Kitulellawatte alias Galgodahena containing in extent of 50

Acres 1 Rood and 20 Perches as set out in village plan No 91 of the

Surveyor General. Her father who owned the said property had

5

relinquished over 200 acres of his lands to the Land Reform Commission

including the 50 acres from the said Kitulellawatte alias Galgodahena Estate.

The Petitioner became the owner of the said extent of plantation

subsequent to the statutory determination made in terms of Section 19 of

the Land Reform Law No.1 of 1972.

It is stated that a village called Gorakagahawatta and a Crown land

called Vitiyalagodahena, where a colony was set up by the Government, are

situated on the northern periphery of her tea plantation and in order to

facilitate a passage for the movement of villagers, lands over 3 Roods in

extent was acquired by the State from the said tea plantation under

provisions of Land Acquisition Act No. 28 of 1964. Subsequent to the said

acquisition of land, an access road was constructed for the benefit of the

villagers of the two villages. Said road is known as Horedola-Vitiyalagoda

Road and is shown as Lot 605 of plan No. 91 (supplement No. 20)/Pl. It

was gazetted on 11.06.2003 in Gazette No. 1292/20 in terms of Section 38A

of the Land Acquisition Act. Thus, the villagers of Gorakagahawatta and the

colony of Vitiyalagodahena have access to the main Makandura-Talahagama-

Akuressa Road across the Petitioner's estate. This road, with its

construction over the Petitioner's esta te, had in effect bisected it into two.

It is stated by the Petitioner, in addition to the said public road, yet

another road exists and had facilitated the villagers of the Vitiyalagodahena

colony in accessing the main Makandura-Talahagama-Akuressa Road. It was

concreted by the 4th Respondent Pradeshiya Sabha and is located merely a

200 meters away from the said Horedola-Vitiyalagoda Road.

6

The starting point of the dispute on which she petitioned this Court

is described by the Petitioner in the 32nd paragraph of her petition, where

she states that on or about 27th July 1991, several persons have, illegally

and without consent of the Petitioner have commenced construction of an

"illegal and unauthorised roadway across her plantation, beginning from

the latter part of the said Horedola-Vitiyalagoda Road leading to a

completely different location on the northern boundary to the

Vitiyalagodahena colony, which is also where the 1st Respondent is residing.

In view of the said act of transgression of her rights, the Petitioner

instituted action before the Matara District Court seeking injunctive and

declaratory relief against the defendants she had named therein. It is stated

by the Petitioner, the Court, having made its observation after an

inspection of the illegal construction, of a roadway proceeded to make

order that the defendants in the said action are "not entitled to use any road

over the Petitioner's land, except the Government road" (Horedola-Vitiyalagoda

Road).

According to the Petitioner, the 1st Respondent and a group of

persons including his brother, have thereafter made a second attempt to

widen the said illegally constructed road on 04.02.2000 by uprooting about

300 tea bushes, cutting across earthen and stone bunds and thereby

causing damage to her plantation.

The Petitioner states that only thereafter the 4th Respondent

Pradeshiya Sabha, in order to legitimise the actions of its Vice Chairman,

(the 1st Respondent) by attempting to initiate acquisition post facto. She

received communication on 29.08.2001 and 03.10.2001, from the 2nd

7

Respondent and a Surveyor, intimating her that the said "illegal" roadway

is to be surveyed for the purpose of acquisition. Despite her objections said

survey was conducted on 16.10.2001 with the assistance of the 1st

Respondent.

It is stated by the Petitioner that a settlement was discussed by the

1st Respondent in the case before the District Court, by which the Petitioner

undertook to concrete the remainder of the HoredoZa- VitiyaZagoda Road,

upon the latter giving up his purported claim over the "illegally"

constructed road. The concreting of the road was to commence with the

approval of the relevant Government officials including the Road

Development Authority and on 27.01.2014, about 45 meters of the said

road was concreted. In the same night some unknown persons have dug

up the newly concreted road using a backhoe and destroyed about 22

meters of concrete. The Petitioner lodged a complaint to Matara Police over

this incident.

It is said that in the backdrop of these several attempts to illegally

construct a road way across the Petitioner's land, the 2nd Respondent,

having included a part of the Petitioner's land under schedule 17 of the

Gazette No. 1766 of 06.07.2012, provided three months for the interested

persons to establish their title over it. In Gazette No. 1774 of 30.08.2012 a

period of one month is provided in relation to the Petitioner's land

included in schedule Nos. 13 and 32 while the Gazette No. 1789 of

14.12.2012 included her lands under parts of schedule Nos. 16, 36 and 55.

The said Gazette stated that pursuant to the declarations in the Gazette

Nos. 1766, 1774 and 1773, the 4th Respondent Sabha had resolved that the

8

lands included therein as lands belonging to the said Sabha, in the absence

of any objection.

It is highlighted by the Petitioner that the Gazette Nos. 1766 and

1774 which contain three different descriptions to the road maps, which

may include a portion of her land since each of these description includes a

reference to Kitulella Estate (Kitulellawatta), which is her land.

The basis of the challenge mounted by the Petitioner on the said

actions of the 1st to 4th Respondents was the illegality of the process as it

violated the manner in which the 4th Respondent Sabha is empowered to

act, particularly under Sections 24 and 26 of the Pradeshiya Sabha Act No.

15 of 1987.

It was stated by the Petitioner that the said Gazetting is ab initio and

ex facie illegal upon the failure to follow the procedure for the declaration

and acquisition of a Pradeshiya Sabha Road in terms of Sections 11, 24(1),

(2), (3) and 26 of the said Act, including the rules and procedure of the said

Sabha had not been followed.

In relation to violation of the provisions of Section 11, the Petitioner

claims that in terms of the Regulations formulated by the Minister, a

procedure for the presentation of an item before the 4th Respondent Sabha

required a notification of such meetings to its members are fully set out,

which procedural step in this instances had not been followed.

The Petitioner claimed that the 4th Respondent Sabha violated

Section 24(I)(a) when it failed to demarcate the purported road, as

required within the time frame stipulated by the Act and, in any event, the

9

said Sabha could not include the "illegal" road in the publications as it had

not been maintained by the said Sabha.

In respect of the violation of the provisions of Section 24(1)(b), the

Petitioner claims that the 4th Respondent Sabha, having failed to comply

with the provisions of Section 24(1)(a) in its failure to demarcate the limits

of such roads, had arbitrarily bypassed the provisions contained in Section

24(1)(b).

According to the Petitioner, statutory provisions contained in

Section 24(3) of the said Act too had been violated by the 4th Respondent,

in its failure to serve notice on the Petitioner in terms of the said section

since the said section "necessarily contemplates the serving of notices in terms

of Section 24(1), and therefore, not only is Section 24(1) a necessary precursor to

the process, but it is also a vital step in the process and is a necessary pre

condition" (emphasis original).

It is also claimed by the Petitioner that the 4th Respondent Sabha had

failed to serve notices on her which is in direct violation of the provisions

contained in Section 26 of the said Act.

The 1 st to 4th, 5th to 7th, 8th , 9th and 11th Respondents have resisted the

application of the Petitioner.

The 1st to 4th Respondents, in their objections have raised four

preliminary objections based on laches, failure to come with clean hands,

failure to follow Rule 3 of the Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules

1990 and had sought to challenge the validity of a resolution of the 4th

Respondent.

10

The 1st to 4th Respondents admit that the disputed roadway is

depicted in Gazette "P21" as schedule 17 and admits that Horedola-

Vitiyalgoda Road is used by the villagers for the past 4 to 5 decades and

had been Gazetted under the Village Councils Ordinance in the Gazette

No. 12,846 of 05.01.1962 (R2).

In relation to the disputed roadway, it is claimed by the

Respondents that the 4th Respondent had passed resolution No. 18 (R6)

and prior approval of the Minister of Local Government of the Southern

Province (R7 and R8) was obtained and therefore they have published the

Gazette notification (P21) "according to law". Since there was no objection,

Gazette notification (P24) was published in terms of Section 24 of the

Pradeshiya Sabha Act No. 15 of 1987. The Respondents further claims that

"the entire process was done according to law and according to the accepted norms

and practices".

The 5th, 6th and 7th Respondents claim that the Petitioner's

application is misconceived, delayed, misrepresented facts and made

without a proper basis.

Objections of the 8th Respondent indicate that he too maintains a

similar position as the 5th to 7th Respondents.

The 9th and 11th Respondents claim that the Respondents have

concreted 290 meters out of 335 meters of Horedola-Vitiyalgoda Road and

admitted that 20 meters of concrete had been dug up and destroyed on

27.01.2014. The 9th and 11th Respondents too claim that the application of

the Petitioner is delayed, misconceived, suppressed material facts and had

11

contained no basis for issuance of Writs of Certiorari, Prohibition and

Mandamus.

In her counter affidavit, the Petitioner claimed that letter P25 was

written on a different context as at that point of time she was made to

understand that attempts were underfoot to acquire a portion of her land

under Section 28 of the Act, but what is now placed in issue is the Gazettes

P21 to P24 which purport to include a portion of her land, as part and

parcel of roads vested in the 4th Respondent Sabha under Section 24.

The Petitioner further claims since the 1st to 4th Respondents have

stated that they are unaware as to her ownership to the tea plantation

called Kitulellawatta" clearly confirms and corroborates" her case that no

notice in terms of Section 26 read with Section 24 could have been

objectively served on her, despite her lawful ownership to Lot No. 621,

called Kitulellawatte alias Galgodahena.

She also claimed that in 1984, the existing road beyond her estate

(road between village Gorokgahawatta and the colony) was Gazetted and

acquired in terms of Plan No.i!lJO /4/83/27 of 05.031985. It is stated that

the said road connects to Horedola-Vitiyalgoda Road, at the northern

boundary of her land and lies through her property providing access to

villagers to Makandura-Talahagama-Akuressa main road at the southern

boundary of her property.

On 22.11.2019, the parties invited this Court to pronounce its

judgment on the comprehensive written submissions which they have

already tendered.

12

The written submissions of the lsi to 41h Respondents indicate that

the written submissions were tendered upon the direction of Court, after

hearing the parties who made oral submissions. This is clearly an

inaccurate statement since the docket indicated that the parties made oral

submissions on 08.11.2018 and since then the matter was listed before

several divisions of this Court.

It is also noted by this Court, although the lsi to 41h Respondents

have raised several preliminary objections in their statement of objections,

they were content to address only the core issues raised by the Petitioner

on the legality of the impugned publications.

In view of the admission by the lSI to 41h Respondents, learned

President's Counsel for the Petitioner had narrowed down his challenge

of legality only to P21 and P24 since" ... Respondents have expressly admitted

that the Petitioner's property has been referred to P21 and P24 only".

In the circumstances, this Court proceeds to consider the contention

of the Petitioner challenging the Gazette publications marked as P21

(Gazette No. 1766 of 06.07.2012) and P24 ( Gazette No. 1789 of 14.12.2012),

leaving out the P22 and P23 from its consideration.

Learned President's Counsel for the Petitioner sought to challenge

the legality of the said two Gazette publications of the 4th Respondent

Sabha under below mentioned grounds, based on the assertion that the

said publications were made in violation of and contrary to the statutory

provisions contained in Section 24 of the Pradeshiya Sabha Act No. 15 of

1987;

13

a. the 4th Respondent had failed to demarcate by permanent marks

the limits of the road and paths maintained by it and prepare

plans of all such roads and paths within three years of the

coming into force of the provisions of the Act as per section

24(1)(a),

b. the letter R7, issued by the Chief Minister seeks to portray

compliance in terms of Section 24(1) is issued ultra vires,

c. there was no notice served personally on the Petitioner, in

violation of the provisions of Section 26, where such notices had

to be served" either upon such person, or by leaving it with some

member of the household, or by affixing it to some conspicuous

place,

d. the 1st to 4th Respondents have acted in mala fide.

The 1st to 4th Respondents have tendered a resolution dated

08.06.2012 to this Court and marked as R6. Under item number 16 of the

said resolution, the road "Beragama Heredola Vitiyalagoda Kitulellawatta" is

mentioned. The road width is given as 22 to 16 feet. The Petitioner

describes the public road that runs through her plantation only as

Horedola-Vitiyalgoda Road.

Therefore, the identity of the roadway that led to the dispute that

had been presented before this Court by the Petitioner, seeking public law

remedies, had to be ascertained at the outset.

Reference to a Horedola-Vitiyalgoda Road can be found in the

documents P3 ( letter by Divisional Secretary dated 12.09.2013, P6(a) -a

14

letter addressed to Secretary to the Ministry of Lands in relation to

acquisition - dated 17.05.2002), P20 (a letter addressed to Secretary, Road

Development Ministry by the Provincial Secretary Mulatiyana dated

27.11.2009 ), P20(d) - ( a letter addressed to Executive Engineer of Road

Development Authority by Provincial Secretary Mulatiyana on 09.10.2011),

P20(e) - (a letter by Administrative Officer to Executive Engineer, RDA

dated 10.10.2013), P20(f) - ( a letter by Provincial Scretary Mulatiyana to

Executive Engineer, RDA on 21.12.2013).

The documents that are relied upon by the 1st to 4th Respondents

also indicate that there is a public road known as Horedola-Vitiyalgoda

Road. Reference to the said road could be found in R3 (a letter written by a

predecessor of the 3rd Respondent addressed to Chairman of Regional

Development Committee on 05.06.2009), R4 and R5 (letters addressed by

two Grama Niladharies to the 2nd Respondent, where the road is described

as" Horedola Vitiyalagoda Kitulella Road").

The description given to the said road by the Village Council in its

publication in the Gazette No. 12,846 of 05.01.1962 as Kitulella Horedola

Road. The Government Surveyor who surveyed the Petitioner's land and

made a plan for the proposed acquisition had described the road as

Horedola Vitiyalagoda Road in 1984 (P5) as the Petitioner did.

Initially the strip of land that had been acquired by the State was

meant for the public purpose of providing access to the Makandura-

Talahagama-Akuressa main road from the village of Gorakagahawatta and

also from the colony established on the Crown land called Vitiyalagodahena.

The acquisition from the Petitioner's land was made in 1979. The

15

document P5 indicate further acquisitions were made by the State from the

private lands situated in lhaladeniya, Gorokgahawatta for the purpose of

extending the length of the said roadway in 1985. Its tracing (annexed to

P5) indicate those lands are situated beyond the northern boundary of the

Petitioner's land. It is therefore understandable by 2012, When the P21

Gazette was published the said road had served several more villages than

it had originally served and therefore was described therein by adding

those village names to its original name Horedola Vitiyalagoda Road by

inclusion of the name of the tea plantation, namely Kitulellawatta, through

which the said road was laid.

The description given to the already existing road by the Petitioner

is Horedola Vitiyalagoda Road, while the resolution passed by the 4th

Respondent Sabha refers to a "Beragama Horedola Vitiyalagoda Kitulellawatta

road". The obvious difference between the two descriptions are the

reference to Beragama and Kitulellawatta. The addition of "Kitulella", is due

to the fact the road had been laid through the Petitioner's tea plantation

called Kitulellawatta. The reference of "Beragama", is because of an

additional village, to which access to main road had been provided

through the said road. This extension to the road Horedola Vitiyalagoda

Kitulellawatta Road was made after the lands that had been acquired by the

State at a subsequent stage from other parties, as indicated by P5. In the

document P5, a notice issued under Section 28 of the Land Acquisition Act

No. 28 of 1964, in relation to four lots, and all four claimants are from

Beragama village. Lot A had its southern boundary consists of "remaining

portion of the land and Kitulellewatta claimed by Devi Balasuriya", the

Petitioner. This is a clear indication that the road way which was laid

16

through the Petitioner's tea plantation was extended beyond her northern

boundary continuing through the four lots that had been acquired to

facilitate access to the villagers of Beragama to reach the main road.

Clearly the road that had been described in the resolution of the 4th

Respondent Sabha dated 08.06.2012 (R6) refers to the road that existed over

four decades and which had been constructed upon the strip of land that

had been acquired from the Petitioner's estate under the provisions of the

Land Acquisition Act.

Therefore, it is clear that these different descriptions are in relation

to one and the same road although they had been differently described by

the parties.

If the challenge of the Petitioner on the validity of the extension of

time granted by the Chief Minister with the issuance of R7 is ignored for

the time being, then the resultant position would be that it had authorised

the 4th Respondent to act under Section 24 of the Act No. 15 of 1987 within

the extended time period in respect of "Horedola Vitiyalagoda Road/

Beragama Horedola Vitiyalagoda Kitulellawatta Road".

But the disputed roadway is not in respect of publicised road of

"Horedola Vitiyalagoda Road/ Beragama Horedola Vitiyalagoda Kitulellawatta

Road" but in relation to a different roadway that had been cut and thereby

branches off from the said Horedola- Vitiyalagoda Road at a particular point,

allegedly towards the colony with a different terminal point near the

residence of the I stRespondent.

In order to consider the challenge mounted by the Petitioner as to

the legality of the publication made by the 4th Respondent Sabha In

17

relation to the provisions contained in Section 24(1) of the Act No. 15 of

1987, this Court finds it necessary to reproduce the said sub section below

to facilitate its said undertaking.

Section 24 states that;

"24(1) It shall be the duty of every Pradeshiya Sabha within three

years of the coming into force of these provisions or within

such further period as may in the special circumstances of

any case be allowed by the Minister

(a) to demarcate by permanent marks, the limits of the

roads and paths maintained by the Pradeshiya

Sabha and cause to be prepared plans of all such

roads and paths; and

(b) to cause notices to be published in the prescribed

manner setting out a list of such roads and paths."

In view of the explicit statutory provisions contained in Section 24(1)

of the Act No. 15 of 1987, a mandatory duty is imposed on the 4th

Respondent Pradeshiya Sabha as it "shall";

1. demarcate by permanent marks, the limits of the roads and

paths maintained by the Pradeshiya Sabha and cause to be

prepared plans of all such roads and paths,

ii. to cause notices to be published in the prescribed manner

setting out a list of such roads and paths.

18

The said Section also specifies the time period within which the 4th

Respondent Sabha should comply with the above highlighted two initial

steps as it states that "within three years of the coming into force of these

provisions or within such further period as may in the special circumstances of

any case be allowed by the Minister."

In dealing with a situation where a Pradeshiya Sabha sought to

construct a roadway upon a paddy field to facilitate access to the same,

this Court, in Kurnwita Pradeshiya Sabha v Ranasinghe & Others -

CA/PHC/57/2015 - decided on 28.06.2019, referring to the provisions of

Section 24 of the Act No. 15 of 1987 has held that " ... according to Section

24 sub section (5), it is very clear that until and unless the Pradeshiya Sabha

complies with the above sections, thoroughfares could not be deemed to be vested to

the relevant Pradeshiya Sabha" and thus emphasising that there must be

compliance of all provisions of Section 24 before a particular road is

deemed vested in a Pradeshiya Sabha.

In view of the said pronouncement, the question whether the 4th

Respondent had complied with the said provisions in full had to be

considered by this Court, in the light of the available material.

The first condition that had to be fulfilled by the 4th Respondent in

this regard is to "demarcate by permanent marks, the limits of the roads and

paths maintained by the Pradeshiya Sabha and cause to be prepared plans of all

such roads and paths" including the disputed roadway. The Petitioner

claimed that the 2nd Respondent intimated by PIO that it intends to

"acquire" the disputed portion of her land and a survey is to be conducted.

The 2nd Respondent in his letter dated 03.10.2001 informed the Petitioner

19

that under the powers vested in him under Sections 20 and 38 of the Act

No. 15 of 1987, a survey is scheduled to be conducted for the purpose of

acquisition of part of Kituiellawatta land.

Except for these two instances there is no reference in the objections

filed by the 1st to 4th Respondents that any survey plan was prepared

indicating the 4th Respondent had taken steps to "demarcate by permanent

marks, the limits of the roads and paths maintained by" by the said Sabha and it

had to "cause to be prepared plans of all such roads and paths" in compliance of

Section 24(1)(a). These two letters relied on by the Petitioner that the

survey was intended only in respect of acquisition of land under Sections

20 and 38 of the Act No. 15 of 1987. The 1st and 4th Respondents were

content to state that they only" admit the sending of the two letters marked PlO

and deny the rest of the averments which are inconsistent to the contents of the

said two letters."

Thus, it is clear that the 4th Respondent had failed to "demarcate by

permanent marks, the limits of the roads and paths maintained by the

Pradeshiya Sabha and cause to be prepared plans of all such roads and

paths" as required by Section 24(1)(a) of the Act No. 15 of 1987.

The second condition that had to be fulfilled by the 4th Respondent is

"to cause notices to be published in the prescribed manner setting out a list of such

roads and paths".

In paragraph 28 of the objections, the 1st to 4th Respondents state that

the Respondents admit the publication of the Gazettes marked as "P21" to

"P24" and state that the "disputed roadway is depicted in Gazette bearing

"P21" (vide pg 1131 Schedule 17) and "P24" (vide pg 2582 schedule 16)" only.

20

In P21 Gazette this road had been described as Beragama Horedola

Vitiyalagoda Kitulellawatta Road. In the Gazette P23, the said road was

described as Vitiyalagoda Mudunahena Kitulellawatta Road. Gazette P24

describes it as Beragama Horedola Vitiyalagoda Kitulellawatta Road.

But the disputed road, according to the 1st to 4th Respondents "is

referred to as Kitulella Horedola Road"as the Petitioner had described the

said road in her Petition. However, it is noted by this Court that none of

the Gazette publications referred to above contain the "Kitulella Horedola

Road" in their respective schedules. The 1st to 4th Respondents have not

clarified as to the difference in the descriptions.

In addition to the two conditions referred to above, as per the

provisions of Section 24, the 4th Respondent had to comply with another

condition as it required the roads that are to be vested in the Sabha should

be published "within three years of the coming into force of these provisions or

within such further period as may in the special circumstances of any case be

allowed by the Minister".

In view of the contention that the 4th Respondent had failed to act

under Section 24(1) within the statutorily stipulated three-year period

since the provisions of the Act No. 15 of 1987 coming into force, the 1st to

4th Respondents have sought to rely on the document marked R7 by which

the Chief Minister of the Southern Province had approved extra time

period from July 2012 to December 2013 for the 4th Respondent to act

under Section 24(1). This approval was granted in relation to the list of

roads that are numbered as 1 to 22, which are included in a resolution

passed by the 4th Respondent Sabha in an annexure to the said letter R7.

21

The Act No. 15 of 1984 was certified on 16.04.1987 and the 4th

Respondent had published the notifications in the Gazettes P21 and P24

only in 2012. The 1st to 4th Respondents sought to rely on the permission

granted by the Chief Minister by his letter R7 where in respect of the roads

that are included in the resolution of the 4th Respondent Sabha, dated

08.06.2012 marked R6, in order to impress upon this Court that the said

letter R7 satisfies the requirement of Section 24(1) which states such

demarcations, plans and publications could be made " ... or withill slIch

further period as nI!l!} ill the special cirCUl1lstmlces of !lily case be !lllmped by the

Ministt!1'- ... ". In R7, the extended time applies to the roads that are listed in

the resolution passed by the 4th Respondent where under item number 16

the road" Beragama Horedola Vitiyalagoda Kitulellawatta" is mentioned.

On its own admission by the 1st to 4th Respondents, the disputed

roadway is referred to as "Kitulella Horedola Road" but the extended period

was granted by the Chief Minister in respect of the road" Beragama Horedola

Vitiyalagoda Kitulellawatta" not to "Kitulella Horedola Road". Again no

clarification from the 1st to 4th Respondents.

Thus, the only reasonable conclusion that could be reached in these

circumstances, that the road known to the Petitioner and 1st to 4th

Respondents as "Kitulella Horedola Road" had not been demarcated by

permanent marks and limits, a plan of it had not been prepared and there

is no publication of its name in the Gazette by the 4th Respondent.

Therefore, the 4th Respondent is in clear violation of the provisions

contained in Section 24(1).

22

In addition to these disqualifications, the provisions of Section 24 of

the Act No. 15 of 1987 empowers the 4th Respondent to act under it only in

respect of "roads and paths maintained by the Pradeshiya Sabha"

indicating that the road or path must be in existence when the said Act

came into operation.

The disputed roadway came in to existence at a very much later

stage as it is clear from the plaint filed by the Petitioner where it is stated

that the disputed roadway was forcibly cut over the Petitioner's tea

plantation only on 27.07.1991, in order to facilitate access to the residence of

the 1st Defendant in the said case. As such it is not a road or a path

maintained by the 4th Respondent when the Act No. 15 of 1987 came into

being, in order to attract provisions of Section 24. Such instances are dealt

with under Section 27 of the said Act.

This Court notes that the 1st to 4th Respondents, by annexmg

photographs marked RIa to RIc, sought to portray that the said

photographs show the" Ki tu lelia Horedola Road". This position could not be

accepted as the said" Kitulella Horedola Road" is referred to as a roadway

that had almost been concreted having the road width of about 16 to 22

feet. But the roadway shown in the three photographs indicate that it is a

narrow gravel road with pebble stones laid in some patches. It obviously

relates to the disputed road that had been cut at a point from the "Kitulella

Horedola Road", to which the 1st to 4th Respondents seek to impute the said

name. The divisional secretary of Mulatiyana clearly indicate that the road

that had been developed by concreting is the road built on the acquired

strip of land under Land Acquisition Act (P20(d)) as stated by the

Petitioner. 23

The fact that the disputed road as stated by the Petitioner is a

different roadway to "Kitulella Horedola Road" is established by the letter

P20G) issued by the District Secretary/Government Agent of Matara to

Executive Engineer of the Road Development Authority by which he

informs that concreting of the existing road would facilitate the "newly

cut" road, which is of about 200 meters in length, which branches off the

said concreted road. He further noted that there are no houses on either

side of the said new road and it is not suitable for vehicular traffic. This

"newly cut" road is an obvious reference to the one complained of by the

Petitioner who challenged its construction in the Matara District Court.

This Court therefore rejects the 1st to 4th Respondents position that the said

photographs depict the concreted" Kitulella Horedola Road".

Thus, the only reasonable conclusion that could be reached under

these circumstances is that the road known to the Petitioner and 1st to 4th

Respondents as "Kitulella Horedola Road" had not been demarcated by

permanent marks and limits by the 4th Respondent and a plan of it also had

not been prepared. In addition, there is no publication of its name in the

Gazette by the 4th Respondent. Therefore, the 4th Respondent's act of

inclusion of the road" Beragama-Horedola-Vitiyalagoda-Kitulellawatta Road"

in the list of roads that were published in schedule 17 of Gazette No. 1766

of 06.07.2012 (P21) and in schedule 16 in Gazette No. 1789 of 14.12.2012

(P24) respectively, was done contrary to the procedure laid down in clear

statutory provisions contained in Section 24(1) of the Act No. 15 of 1987

and therefore done in ultra vires of Section 24(1).

24

Therefore, the inclusion of the road" Beragama-Horedola-Vitiyalagoda-

Kitulellawatta road" in the said two Gazette notifications (P21 and P24) are

hereby quashed by issuance of Writ of Certiorari.

In her petition, the Petitioner also sought a Writ of Certiorari in

quashing the purported vesting of her land forming the subject matter as a

road under the 4th Respondent Sabha as she seeks thereby to quash "all

underlying decisions relating to the same, any orders jdecisions j recommendations

made by the 1st to 4th Respondents pertaining or affecting her land as a road vested

or belonged to the said Sabha".

The Petitioner is entitled to the said relief since the 4th Respondent

Sabha publication of the road in P21 and P24 is meant to serve as notice to

the affected land owners who might have a interest with the roads that are

included in these publications and in the absence of any objection by such

land owner, deemed vested in the 4th Respondent Sabha, in view of the

provisions of Section 24.

Section 23 of the Act No. 15 of 1987 declares that "all thoroughfares

within the Pradeshiya Sabha area, other than principal thoroughfares, except in so

far as such thoroughfares are already vested by virtue of any other enactment, shall

be deemed to be vested in the Pradeshiya Sabha of that area."

Section 24(5) states "Upon publication of such notice under subsection (3) or (4),

all such roads and paths or portions of such roads and paths as defined in such

notices and depicted by such plans shall be deemed to be vested in the Pradeshiya

Sabha."

It appears from the deeming provisions that had been inserted by the

Legislature in these two sections confers a Pradeshiya Sabha with the

25

authority over the thoroughfares in its area, and in relation to the powers

that had been specified in Part III of the Act No. 15 of 1987 where the

"Powers and Duties as to Thoroughfares" of a Pradeshiya Sabha are clearly

spelt out.

Since Section 24(5) had included "all such roads and paths or portions of

such roads and paths as defined in such notices" it is reasonable to assume that

the disputed portion of the roadway that had been cut through the

Petitioner's tea plantation could also be considered as "deemed vested" in

view of the unchallenged publication in P21 and P24.

This Court had already quashed the publication of P21 and P24 as

ultra vires of the powers of the 4th Respondent, who failed to comply with

the mandatory provisions contained in Section 24(1) of the Act. Since there

is uncertainty over the description of the disputed roadway, whether it is a

road, a path or a portions of a road or a path, the Petitioner is entitled to

the protection of law in seeking out a Writ of Certiorari to quash any

vesting of such disputed road, path or a portion of a road or a path.

It is also the complaint of the Petitioner, in support of her contention

of illegality over the actions of the 1st to 4th Respondents under Section 24,

that they have failed to serve notice of the publications in the manner

provided for in Section 26, where it is stated "Every notice required to be

given under this part may be served either personally upon such person, or by

leaving it with some member of his household, or by affixing it to some

conspicuous part of his residence."

This is obviously not the case when the provisions of Section 24 is

examined in its proper context. Sections 24(1)(b) and 24(4) contain the

26

,

words "cause notices to be published in the prescribed manner" while 24(3)

refers to " ... notice under subsection (1) is published in the Gazette, ... ". It is

therefore clear that a Pradeshiya Sabha is expected to publish its notices

that are required to be publish under Section 24 in the Gazette. In this

instance, the impugned publications of the 4th Respondent namely P21 and

P24 are made in the Gazette and thus it is clear that there is no valid basis

for the contention of the Petitioner that she should have been personally

served with notice under Section 26. The word "may be" as it appears in

Section 26 is significant in this context since Section 24 also speaks of

notice. But the said section contains the manner in which such notices be

made.

Lastly, this Court turns its attention to the Petitioner's prayer for the

issuance of Writ of Prohibition on the 1st to 4th Respondents. In seeking a

Writ of Prohibition the Petitioner sought to prevent the 1st to 4th

Respondents from deeming, treating, claiming, acquiring, classifying,

demarcating, using, permitting to be used the Petitioner's land or a portion

thereof described in the schedule to the petition as a road vested in,

belonging to the 4th Respondent Sabha under any of the said Gazettes as

opposed to the Government already built on the lot depicted as lot No. 605

in Final Plan No. 91 (PI).

In relation to this issue the Court notes that it is evident from the

material that the 1st and 2nd Respondents were motivated and had acted

with some personal interest rather than on mala fides, as alleged by the

Petitioner, in the construction of the "illegal" portion of the road through

her tea plantation.

27

Since the publications P21 and P24 had already made ultra vires by

this judgment, this Court is inclined to grant the said Writ of Prohibition

against the 1st to 4th Respondents as prayed for by the Petitioner.

In view of the above reasoning, this Court makes the following

orders;

a. the act of the 4th Respondent in the inclusion of the road

"Beragama-Horedola-Vitiyalagoda-Kitulellawatta Road" in the list of

roads that were published in schedule 17 of Gazette No. 1766 of

06.07.2012 (P21) and in schedule 16 in Gazette No. 1789 of

14.12.2012 (P24) respectively, are quashed by the issuance of Writ

of Certiorari,

b. all underlying decisions relating to the Petitioner's land as

described in the schedule to the instant petition and any orders/

decisions /recommendations made by the 1st to 4th Respondents

pertaining or affecting the said land as a road vested or belonged

to the said Sabha is also quashed by the issuance of a Writ of

Certiorari,

c. a Writ of Prohibition is issued to prevent the 1st to 4th

Respondents from deeming, treating, claiming, acquiring,

classifying, demarcating, using and permitting to be used the

Petitioner's land or a portion thereof described in the schedule to

the petition as a road vested in, belonging to the 4th Respondent

Sabha under any of the said Gazettes P21 or P24 except the

28

roadway Government had already demarcated and built on the

lot depicted as lot No. 605 in Final Plan No. 91 (PI).

The application of the Petitioner is allowed.

Parties will bear their costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

29