IN THE COU , T OF APPEAL OF TIlE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIAtIST REPUBLIC OF ~',RI LANKA

C.A. Case N 0.572/1999 (f)

D.C. Avissawella Case No.l9406/L

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Decided on

'.

A.C.M_ Mukthar,

'Ruwanwella Di0pensary',

No. 119, Main Sti'eet,

Ruwanwella.

DEFENDANT -APPELLANT

1. G.S.F.Mukthar,

2. M.M.M.Safran.

Substituted DEFENDANT -APPELLAN TS

-Vs-

A.R. Haniffa

No.06/236, Band' ranaika Mawatha,

Thihariya,

Kalagedihena.

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,j.

," Jacob J oseph w(~h Sandamali Madurawa~a for the

Defendant-Appellants

Vidura Gunaratne with R.J. Upali De Almeida for the Plaintiff-Respondent

25.07.2018

1

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J. B

y a plaint dated 07.11.1994, the Plaintiff-Respondeht (hereinafter sometimes referred

to as the Plaintiff) , instituted this action against his maternal uncle-the original

Defendant-Appellant (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the Defendant) seeking inter

alia to have him ejected frpm the premises depicted in the pt schedule to the plaint and to

secure vacant possession ., whilst he claimed the good.-;; described in the 2nd schedule or

alternatively their value t,r, a sum of Rs.41,SOOi-. The premises were described as No.1l9,

Main Street, Ruwanwella in the District of Kegalle. The plaintiff A.R. Haniffa alleged that

it was his father-Dr. A.C.tv1. Haniffa who was a tenant of the premises and after his demise

on 17.01.1986, he became the tenant of the premises aI.d thereafter he gave his ,uncle-Dr.

A.C.M. Mukthar (the Defendant) leave and licence to oqcupy the premises and operate his

medical centre. The Pla~r,ltiff also alleged that the Jwner of the premises ~ :vas one

Siriwardene who accepte,d the rent that had been depos"~ted at the Ruwanwella Pradeshiya

, ' Sabha.

The cause of action raised against the Defendant was that though the leave alfd licence

were terminated on 30.06,1994, he repudiated the existence of such a leave and licence and

in violation of the licencl.', he continued to be in occupation of No.1l9, Ma;in Street,

Ruwanwella and failed t~' hand over possession and rherefore he should be ejected and

" ordered to pay damages f~om 01.07.1994-the day after the leave and licence had ~llegedly

been terminated. In fact the Defendant traversed il3 his answer inter alia that he had

purchased the property from the original owner Siriwaxdene on 23rd july 1993 an,d become

the absolute owner of the property.

So the pith and substa:l;li:e of the case of the Plaintjff that was alleged against the

pefendant was that the Defendant and all those holc{ing under him should hand over

possession of No.1l9, Wb in Street, Ruwanwella since the le::tve and licence had been

terminated.

2

"

, ;

Defendant's Position

I

As I said above, the Defeniant repudiated any suggesti9n of leave and licence made by the

Plaintiff. The Defendant. further traversed that the Plaintiff's father-Dr. A.C.M. Haniffa

! " and he had been carrying -:)n their medical practice in p:lrtnership since 1984 and after the

death of Dr. Haniffa on 17.01. 1986, he became the tel)~mt of the premises and had been

carrying on his medical practice and at no stage did the Plaintiff (son of Dr. Haniffa and

his nephew) give him any leave and licence.

\ The Defendant-Dr. Mukt~r further averred that long'ibefore the Plaintiff insti~uted this

action 07.11.1994, Siriwarq.fne (the owner of the pren~$es) had sold the premis~s to him

on 23.07.1993 and he vvas the current owner of the premises, No.1l9, Main Street,

I Ruwanwella. Thus the Defendant countered the claim of the Plaintiff with his version of

his title that had accrued to him almost 10 months before the institution of the action. By

virtue of this title the Defendant sought a dismissal of the action.

Much argument before th~p Court was focused on the question of whobecame the tenant . of these premises just aft:~:r the death of Dr.A.C.M.Hanifa on 17.01.1986. The Plaintiff-the

. to ~ r on of Dr. A.C . M.Haniff~l , claimed that it was him wl-m became the tenant whereas the

maternal uncle-the Defendant asserted that he succeeded to the tenancy.

For purposes of convenience I would bifurcate the period of time between 17.01'.1986- the

date of the demise of the .original tenant Dr. A.C.M.Harl"Ifa and the institution of the case

on 07.11.1994. The first'IP,eriod is between 17.01.1986(;lnd November 1990, while the 2nd

period would be betwe~p' December 1990 and 07.E.l994. The Defendant bqught the

premises on 23.07.1993, \vhich would fall within the ~~d period. In other words one and

,I. year and four months prior to the institution of the cas~', the Defendant became the owner

of the property in question.

As it would be apparent! in the course of this judgment, the Defendant did become the

tenant of the premises aJ\ctl continued in that capacity ~n the 2nd period namely ~ometime

, I between December 1990, and 27.07.1993. Whilst in ,the capacity of a tenant under

, ' , Siriwardene, there is evidence that on 27. 07.1993 the, Defendant changed his :status by 1 , ; " , I

3

I becoming the absolute owner of the property as Siriwardene-the owner of the property

I , conveyed it to the Defendant. These are material facts in the case. Instead it appears to me

that the parties concentrated more on the question of who became the tenant immediately

after the demise of the original tenant-Dr. A.C.M.Haniffa. In other words the question that

figured prominently at ;the trial was-who became the tenant after the demise of

A.C.M.Haniffa in the pt period I have mentioned above. It would appear that the trial , judge too concentrated oti this question and so did the counsel who argued the case before

this Court. Once the tenant after the death of A.C.M.Haniffa was identified, the

contention before this Court was that the status of tep-ant, whether it belonged to the

Plaintiff or Defendant, it continued till 27.07.1993 -the date on which Siriwardene sold the

premises the Defendant. ,f

! The Plaintiff's counsel ar;ued before me that since it \v: s the Plaintiff who was the tenant

after his father'S death, the status continued despite the fact that the title of the premises

devolved on the Defendant on 23.07.1993. Mr Vidura Tuneratne for the Plaintiff argued . that the despite the sale of the property to the Defendant, the Defendant n;mained a

licensee of the Plaintiff and he must surrender possession of the premises to the Plaintiff

~nd then litigate his title. The learned Additional District Judge of Avissawella was also

guided by this principle a~~d it was in those circumstahces that he allowed the ejectment

of the Defendant by his jt3dgment dated 26.04.1994 .

. ' .

In fact this principle is all application of the rule founded on estoppel as exemplified by

Section 116 of the Evid nce Ordinance. Bonser C.J. and Withers J. propounded this

principle deriving from estoppel in Alvar Pillai v Karuppen (1899) 4 N.L.R 321. In that

case the defendant was let into possession of the whole,land in dispute by the plaintiff on

I a non-notarial document., When the terms of the letting expired, the defendant refused to

, . give up possession on the ground that he had acquired title to half the land from a third

t'arty. Bonser C.J. said at p 322: "Even though the own,:=:rship of one half of this land were

in the defendant in himself, it would seem that by our b.w, having been let into p~ssession

of the whole by the plaintiff, it is not open to him to ref11se to give up possession1 and then

it will be open to him to litigate about the ownership." In similar vein, Withers J said:

4 \

"Taking as proved~and I thi.nk it is proved~that the defendant took possession of the whole

of the property in question from the plaintiff, it was his manifest duty under our law to

restore it to the plaintiff oS soon as his term of tenancy had expired."

,

This rule based on Voet lS.2.32 is set out by Masssdorp as follows:

"A lessee is not entitled to dispute his landlord's title, an~ consequently, he cannot refw;e to give up

possession of the property to the termination of his lease on the ground that he is himself the

rightful owner of the ::ame. His duty in such a case is first to restore the property to the lessor and

then to litigate with him as to [he ownership."~ Institutes of Cape Law (4th Edition)Volume 3, at

p 348.

, , , In Ruberuv and Another v. W.ijesooriya [1998] 2 SI~. I LR 58 UdeZ GunawardanaJ in

striking down the order vf a District Judge to amend the plaint in the case t6;include a

prayer for a declaration of title quite perspicaciously alluded to the aforesaid rule in section

116 of the Evidence OrdiJ.1ance which is analogous to,',the doctrine of the Rom~n~ Dutch

common law. ;It j Whether it is a licenk e or a lessee, the question of tidt!, is foreigrl to a suit in ejectment against

either. The licensee (defendant~respondent) obtaining p' ssession is deemed to obtain ,it upon the

terms that he will not dispute the title of the plaintifFappe:llant without whose permissi(\n he would

not have got it. The ~JJect of s. 116 Evidence Ordinance is that if a licensee desires to citallenge the

title under which he is in occupation he must first quit't~e land. The fact that the licensee or the

, \ , lessee obtained possfsslon from the plaintifFrespondent is perforce an admission of the fact that

I the title resides in the plaintiff

1 hasten to point out that: there are circumstances in v~hich no estoppel based o~ section

116 arises and as I will shoy\! presently, this case throwsllp a category of a distinct situation

in which the rule embodi~d in section 116 of the Evid .~nce Ordinance has no application

and the learned Addition~l District Judge had not borne in mind the departures from the

rule on section 116 of the Evidence Ordinance.

5

~ter giving my anxious , consideration to the evidenc\~ led in the case, I come to a firm

conclusion that it does p.ot matter who became the tenant in the first period. Rival

I .~ . arguments have indeed b6:en made on both sides to show that one or the other became the

tenant in the pt period rifmely after the original tenant A.C.M.Haniffa (the father of the

\ . Plaintiff) had passed aw~yon 17.01.1986 and in my view in order to resolve the issues in

the case, it becomes necelssary to ascertain who was tlle tenant between December 1990

I

~md 23.07.1993. This is the period ending on 23.07.199 :~ when the Defendant bought the

property from the title holder Siriwardene. I take the first terminal as December 1990

I because it is from this month, according to Siriwardene, that the Defendant began to pay

rent at the rate of Rs 30 until he bought the property from Siriwardene on 23.07. 1993. . ',' '. , I I The passage of title frorr~ Siriwardene to the Defendant on 23.07. 1993 is quite material

enough to dispose of this; case because this peculiar situation throws up an instance of a

departure from Section 116 .of the Evidence Ordinance. Before the title passed to the

Defendant on 23. 07. 1993 by a deed bearing No 4877 ( V2), there is evidence in the case

that the Defendant had become the tenant of Siriwardene-the original owner 9f No 119,

" Main Street, Ruwanwell :. The tenancy of the Defendant under Siriwardene somewhere

~etween December 1990. a~ld 2yd July 1993, coupled with the fact that the title passed to , the Defendant on 2yd July 1993, are material facts that afford a departure from ~he rule of

~ . estoppel embodied in sec cion 116 of the Evidence Ordinance. The learned Additional

~ . . '. . District Judge had not Fe en cognizant of this distinct exception and the fact that the

Defendant became a tenant of Siriwardene sometime after December 1990 shows that the

~laintiff had lost his te~~ncy somewhere after Dec~mber 1990 assuming th~t he had

tenancy before Decembet:1990.

'~l ..

So December 1990 marks fl watershed in the facts of the case and it is for this reason I hold

the firm view that it is indonsequential to indulge in an:analysis of who became t'he tenant

9n 17.01.1986-the day the father of the Plaintiff A.C.M: Haniffa passed away. Was it the

Plaintiff ( the nephew) o_ ~ the Defendant (the maternaL uncle) who became the, tenant at

the beginning? That was ~he pivotal question at the trial. The learned Additional District

Judge held that it was th~ Plaintiff (the nephew) who was the tenant under Siriwardene.

6

Therefore the licencee (the Defendant uncle) must surrender possession and litigate to

establish his title even though title devolved on him in July 1993. In May 1994 the Plaintiff

terminated what he called his agency he had given to t}1e uncle occupy the premises and

directed him to quit by June 1994 (PI0). The Defendant uncle responded that he had paid

rent for the premises not only from January 1986 but a~so up to 2yd July 1993. This seems

to be the import of the letter that the Defendant wrote to the Plaintiff in response to the

quit notice-see the respm1 ~e marked as PH. Whilst the .Plaintiffhas argued that he became

t , the tenant from J anuary~ 1986 and he continued to be 0 even during the 2nd period, the

Defendant has contended that right throughout till, 23.07.1993 when he bought the

. ., ~ premises, he remained the tenant of the premises. ]\Jo doubt it is the argument of the

Plaintiff that won the dav in the District Court but ther is a salient feature of the Plaintiff's

j I

case that has not been co}sidered by the learned Addidonal District Judge of Avissawella.

There are undoubtedly ar~ments that this Court heard on who succeeded to the tenancy I . ; after the death of the original tenant A.C.M.Haniffa on l?th January 1986. The Plaintiff led

the evidence of the OWilET of the premises Siriwardene to establish that Siriwardene

. I recognized him as the tenant. The Plaintiff also prodl"ced in CO'.1rt a joint affidc,~t of the

Defendant and Plaintiff's'mother marked P14 wherein t~1.e Defendant had affirmerl that the

Plaintiff had succeeded t ;~, his father. An argument wa,s advanced by the coum:el for the

Defendant that though the Defendant had recognized ip his joint affidavit the P.1aintiff as

, . , , having succeeded to the tenancy, it was erroneous in la'w because a son could not succeed

.;' " to the father in respect C~f business premises if the son had not been in the same business

, IIL-I . ; as the father-see section 36 (2) ( c) of the Rent Act No 7 of 1972. The Additional District , t . , .. .. , Judge accepts this legal position but goes on to hold tl-~at the Plaintiff became the tenant

" J

I because the owner Siriwardene had testified that the Plaintiff was indeed his tenant. This

~ssertion of tenancy wa~ '~ trenuously resisted by the l)efendant who categorically stated

; . . :' . that it was his money th~t the Plaintiff paid to the Pr~deshiya Sabha as rent but in the

. , Plaintiff's name. There w~~ some force in the testimony of the Defendant that ~is money

" t. ~ was paid as rent albeit iri~ ~he Plaintiff's name and th .... 1S there were two rival versions at

. '. '! the trial but the learned;Additional District Judge prderred to accept the version of the

, <'. :' . 'l ,I 7

'.

l'i , ., , ; I .,'

J ' , , plaintiff and held that the Plaintiff became the tenant 'immediately after the demise of his

, , father A.C.M. Haniffa on rrrh January 1986. The learned Additional District Judg~ has also

gone on the assumptio~~ as misconceived as it is, 'that this tenancy had continued

~ninterrupted but the evidence seems to be to the contrary. I now turn to that evidence

I . . which strikes at that assu~nption . This was an item of evidence that the learned Additional

. ' I District Judge of Avissawdla failed to consider.

Stoppage of payment of rent by the Plaintiff

Whilst giving evidence for the Plaintiff, Siriwardene/tlie owner of the premises~came out

, , With an important item of evidence. He testified that sometime after another premises No

121, Main Street, Ruwanwdla was sold by him to the Plaintiff's family, the Plaintiff simply

\ . . ~topped paying rentals iF). respect of No 119, Main Street/the subject matter of the case.

The witness asserted th'at after the Plaintiff stopped. paying the rentals, it was the

Defendant who paid the,'ent continuously. As a result he in the end executed a transfer

pf the premises to the Defendant/ see page 5 of the proceedings dated 23.09.1997. This

evidence given by a witri~ss summoned by the Plainfcf remains uncontradicted. I must

. . state that Siriwardene d~scribed the commencing tqprinal of the Defendant's payment

,\ '-~ of rent as December 1990 in a document marked as VI but he did admit at the trial on

I I ~I "! J 23.09.1999 that VI was inaccurate. Even the Defendant disputed the commencing terminal

\ ' ~. ' of December 1990 was wrong but he was emphatic thc1;t he had been paying the rent since

one and a half years prior to the institution of the case-:ee page 8 of the procee~ngs dated

26.01.1999. In other words he had been paying rent to Siriwardene for nearly 18 months

~nd this led to Siriwardene executing a deed of transfer)n favour of the Defendant on 2yd

.f , . July 1993. This evidence r'emains unchallenged.

, , Thus the is evidence of S1riwardene (the Plaintiff's wiqless) and the Defendant at the trial

to the effect that the Plaintiff had refrained from paying rent for nearly 18 months and it

. . was the Defendant who paid the rent. This was uncontradicted and unassailed, evidence

that does not inure to the benefit of the Plaintiff.

" .

\. ,

8

Abandonment of tenanc:y by the Plaintiff

The omission of the Plainttff to pay rent in respect of pr~mises No 119 for nearly 18 months

raises the question of abandonment of tenancy on the part of the Plaintiff. In order that

there might be abandonment not only should the tenant leave the premises but his

intention to abandon should also be clear. A person cannot abandon a right without

intending to do so,vide Mouson v Boehm (18fl4) 26 Ch.D 398: Nagamani v

Vinayagalnoorthy (1923); 24 N. L R. 438. A tempora 'y departure vvith the intention of

returning to the preITl~i~es does not constitute abandonment,vide Tambiah J in

fremaratne v Suppiall C~t N.LR 276. In l:airisinghe ~ Charlis Singho (2000) 3 SrLLR , ' 380, UdeZ Guna\vardana J explained the distinction between surrender and

abandonment. Surrender' differs from abandonment. Abandonment of rights is simply an

act on the part of a lesseelrenant. Surrender is a contraCtual act and occurs by mutual act.

, It simply means that abahclonment of one's right is a u.nilateral act that has to be inferred

from conduct or evidenc~ ' In the unabridged edition of r:he Random House Dictionary, the

) "vord 'abandon' has been explained as meaning 'to le ~:i. ve completely and finally; forsake

utterly; to relinquish, renounce; to give up aU concern in something'. According to the

Dictionary of English law by Earl Jowitt (1959, edition) 'abandonment' means

'relinquishment of an inc~rest or claim'. According to Black's La"v Dictionary (Tenth

Edition), 'abandonment'.' means relinquishing or giving up with the intention of never

. , 1 again reclaiming one's rip-hts or interest.

Therefore, the intention to abandon may be inferred;from the acts and condt;lct of the

party, and is a question of fact. One cannot get away from the evidence led by the plaintiff

himself. His onlywitnes~;; Siriwardene testified that for 18 long months, the Plaintiff

refrained from paying the rentals but the Defendant I1alided over the rentals. It is therefore

irrational and preposter(1us to argue that the Plaintiff continued to remain a tenant of

, Siriwardene. The tenancy hetween Siriwardene and the Plaintiff had lapsed or suffered

extinction through ahindonment. Instead a new ' tenancy was created bet\\Teen

, Siriwardene and the Defendant. If I may put it in another way, the nephe\v (the Plaintiff) , , had acquiesced in the pay!pent of rent by the uncle (the Defendant) directly to Siriwardene

9

(the owner of the premise,s). I would further conclude that by acquiescing in th~ payment

I 6f rent by the Defendant, the Plaintiff must be taken toh-ave acknowledged the Defendant

as the tenant.

vVhat stronger evidence.'of abandonment does one need rather than the acquiescence on

, the part of the Plaintiff il],che payment of rent by the Defendant for 18 months? Assuming , ' , that the Plaintiff had tendncy under Siriwardene, it was superseded ~vhen the Defendant

started paying rentals dire.ctly to Sirhvardne. It is irratiDnal to think that the Pl,!intiff was

not aware of the payment of rentals by the Defend~nt. The defendant \vas practising

medicine at the premises ~md it was as plain as a pikestaff that Sirivvardene would never

allow somebody to occupy the premises for free. The Defendant brought the f.act of his

, ' payment rent to the notiq:-> of the Plaintiff by Pll and h~ testified to this effect at the trial.

The corroborative evidence came from Siriwardene wl'o ~vas summoned by the Plaintiff.

this evidence of non-payment of rent and cons~quent forfeiture of te~ancy by

, abandonment remains unchallenged. 50 I would make bJlcl to observe that it was the case of the

'j Plaintiff that the Defendant was the tenant of5iriwardenc. It v,:41s the case of the Plaintiff because

abandonment of tenancy I~rose in the course of the trial on the evidence aclduce~ by him.

In the circumstances it )vas incumbent on the part o~ the Additional District Judge of

AVissawella to have raised,an issue on abandonment and'resolved the issues inherent in the I .

<;:ase by indulging in an analysis of the evidence, but the judgement suffers from,a paucity

of that analysis.

So I conclude that the Plaintiff had forfeited his tenanc r by July 1993 and on 2yd July 1993

the defendant became thJ. absolute owner of the property. The so called leave and licence

I that the Plaintiff spoke ~f had become extinguished once the abandonment of tenancy

took place. The Plaintiff has no right to give a licen((,~ in respect of property which has

abandoned. Undoubtedly one does not have to be an owner of a property to grant a licence.

In the circumstances of this case the licensor has to be tlae o~vner or a tenant. If the Plaintiff

ceases to be a tenant, he forfeits the right to grant a licence or even maintain that his so

called licence persists. tC?nce the new contract of tenancy \vas created between

Siriwardene and the Defendant, the Defendant became a tenant on Siriwardene's land and

, J

10

I,

it is preposterous for tho,Plaintiff to speak of a licence which had got extinguished. The

I Defendant cannot be a 'tenant of an owner whilst :tt the same time having another

character of a licensee of someone who no longer has an interest in the land. So no question

of licence arose in the case, come July 1993.

It is for this reason that I ommented at an anterior stage of this judgement that estoppel

of tenancy encapsulated In Section 116 of the Evider ce Ordinance "vould not operate

against the Defendant. \tVhen the so called licensor (the Plaintiff) has lost his tenancy,

how can he use section 116 of the Evidence Ordinance aagainst the Defendant) This is one

exceptional situation where the rule embodied in section 116 of the Evidence Ordinance

has no application. NagaJingam J put it in a nutshell in Cader v Nicholas Appuhamy

I (1948) 50 N.L.R 93.

It is sufficient to sa)' that the estoppel of a tenant, as ~nunciated in section 116 of the Evidence

Ordinance only bars;'thc tenant from denying that the landlord had at the beginning of the tcnancy,

a title to the property,. It docs not, however, prevent the t~l1ant from showing that the landlord has

lost title since."

If the Plaintiff had the right to possession as a tenar t under Siriwardene and given a

licence to the Defendant, indisputably it is not open to the Defendant to deny that the

Plaintiff had a title to pm;session at the time when th~ hcence was given. This is the rule

of estoppel in section 116. But it has no application \.vhen the licensor has lost his title to

possession. The licensee em show the forfeiture of th '~ title to possession on the part of

the licensor. The licensee can sho\.v that the licensor bas lost his title since. Thi8 evidence

of forfeiture emerged in trle course of the Plaintiff's case itself but the learned Additional . District Judge misdirected himself when he erroneously held that the Defendant must

restore possession to a person \vho had already lost the title to possession. He overlooked

I abandoill11ent of tenancy an.d erroneously applied sect:ion 116 of the Evidence Ordinance, , whereas he should have departed from its application .

Thus the Plaintiff had no right to demand the ejectment of the Defendant who b ;came the

0\Vner of the property afi:::T having become the tenant of Siriwarclene in the first; instance. ,

11

There was indeed no cauGc of action that had accrued .0 the Plaintiff to seek the eviction

of the Defendant and he could not have terrninated a non~existent licence.

In the circumstance the judgment of the District Court of Avissawella dated 24.06.1999 is

set aside and I proceed to allow the appeal of the DefencJant~Appellant. The Plaintiff's case

is thus dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

"

12'