==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Orders in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus

under Article 140 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Sri Lanka Bureau of Foreign Employment, No. 234, Denzil Kobbekaduwa Mawatha, Koswatta, Battaramulla. CA (Writ) App. No. 008/2024

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. Sarath Chandrasiri Withana,

Arbitrator, No. 13/1127, Dammodaya Mawatha, Mihidupura, Battaramulla.

2. Hon. Manusha Nanayakkara,

Minister of Labour and Foreign Employment, Ministry of Labour and Foreign Employment, 6th Floor, Mehewara Piyasa, Narahenpita, Colombo 05.

2

2A. Hon. Vijitha Herath,

Minister of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Employment and Tourism, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Republic Building, Sir Baron Jayathilake Mawatha, Colombo 01.

3. B.K. Prabath Chandrakeerthi,

Commissioner General of Labour, 6th Floor, Mehewara Piyasa, Narahenpita, Colombo 05.

4. W.K.A. Indumathi,

No. 421/C/17, Pragathi Mawatha New Road, Kahathuduwa.

5. N.A.S. Nakandala,

Buwelikada, Dunukewala, Hiriwadunna.

6. W. Pushpakanthi,

“Sandeepa”, Punchi Maragashena, Polommaruwa, Thangalla.

7. M.C. Weeratne,

No. 92/7/B, Ambuldeniya Mawatha, Hokandara South.

8. M.S. Marasinghe,

No. 223, 3 Ela, Hadungamuwa, Mathale.

9. G.K.C. Dilrukshi,

No. 198/1/B, Sri Wickrama Road, Ihala Bomiriya, Kaduwela.

10. K.R. Siriwardena,

C, Nandana, Denipitiya.

3

11. M.S.N. Samantha,

No. 46/6, Walawwattha, Bandaragama Road, Kuda Wasgamuwa, Wasgamuwa.

12. K.M.G.G.D.K. Konara,

No. 993/3, Trincomalee Road, Aluwihare, Mathale.

13. S.A. Abeyratne,

No. 255/B/3, Asiri Mawatha, Siyabalagoda, Polgasowita.

14. W.G. Somawathi,

“Sithumina”, Marakade Asala, Palltthara, Modarawana.

15. K.M.K. Manike,

No. 2F/FO/U 15, Lake Crescent Residencies, Mandawila Road, Angoda.

16. D.A.S.R.C. Nawaratne,

No. 1/14, Gama Mada Road, Saarikkamulla, Keselwaththa, Panadura.

17. H.D.D. Bandaranayaka,

No. 172/16/05, 2nd Post, Pasyala Road, Ellakkala.

18. P.M.R. Pathirana,

No. 509/A, Ruwanpura Place, Aggona Junction, Angoda.

19. K.D. Anura,

No. 310, 1st Lane, Pasal Mawatha, Uda Karawita,

4

Rathnapura.

20. M.L.S.D. Maddegoda,

No. 123A, Karawita, Rathnapura.

21. P.A. Samarasundara,

No. 216/6/10, Sudarshana Mawatha, Malabe.

22. R.D.K. Rupasingha,

No. 217, Pubudugama, Mulleriyawa.

RESPONDENTS

Before: Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Counsel:

Charaka Hayarathne with Nethmi Silva instructed by Tharushika Fernando for the

Petitioner.

Dilantha Sampath, S.C. for the Respondents.

Argued on: 13.10.2025

Delivered on: 22.12.2025

5

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Judgement

Introduction

The Petitioner is a body corporate incorporated by the Sri Lanka Bureau of Foreign Employment

Act, No. 21 of 1985, a Special Act of Parliament. By virtue of the provision thereof, it is capable

of suing and being sued in its corporate name.

The 1st Respondent is the Arbitrator who had made an award marked as X10, after an arbitration

inquiry. The 2nd Respondent is the Minister who is empowered to refer the dispute between the

Petitioner and the 4th to 22nd Respondents to arbitration. The 3rd Respondent is the Commissioner

General of Labour. The 4th to 22nd Respondents are employees of and under the Petitioner who

claim that they had not been given due promotions in due course; therefore, an industrial dispute

had arisen between the parties. As such, the 2nd Respondent had referred the dispute to arbitration

in terms of Section 4 of the Industrial Disputes Act, No. 43 of 1950 (as amended), under which he

is empowered to do so.

The Arbitrator has granted an arbitral award in favour of the 4th to 22nd Respondents as reflected

in X10; thus, being aggrieved by the said arbitral award, which is also published in the Gazette as

required by the law and reflect in X12, the Petitioner seeks to invoke the writ jurisdiction of this

Court to inter alia quash the said arbitral award X10 and X12 by this Application.

Formal notice was issued by this Court, and after filing Objections, this was fixed for Arguments.

This was argued before me on 13.10.2025, and the following arguments were advanced. Hence,

this judgement.

6

Arguments

The contention advanced by the Counsel for and on behalf of the Petitioner is that the Arbitrator

has not considered and followed the recruitment scheme adhered to by the Petitioner in recruiting

the officers for Class M-VI. Therefore, the arbitral award awarded by the 1st Respondent is against

the weight of the evidence adduced before him.

The next argument is that the 4th to 22nd Respondents had not passed the test or interview with the

required marks of fifty percent; therefore, they are ineligible to be recruited as Class M-VI

Officers; despite that fact, it is the view of the 1st Respondent to redress their grievances for not

being recruited as Class M-VI Officers with effect from 05.04.2012 which could not have been

done as there were no vacancies in the cadre to absorb them.

The next contention is that the Grievance Committee, having looked into the matter, made certain

suggestions, and on their suggestions and proposals, certain officers were absorbed into Class M-

VI. However, those who had not scored the required marks at the interview were not recruited.

Furthermore, it is also argued for and on behalf of the Petitioner, that some of the officers who are

party to the arbitration, had already retired from the service; therefore, their grievances cannot be

redressed as arbitral award itself to that extent is not legally binding.

However, the learned State Counsel for the 1st to 3rd Respondents, Mr. Sampath informed the Court

that they will abide by any order of the Court for that purpose, except mere defending of the arbitral

award.

Now I will consider the relevant facts that are not in dispute to avoid the repetition of facts in

considering the arguments advanced by the Petitioner.

7

Factual matrix

The Petitioner is a body corporate, incorporated under a special Act of Parliament. The 4th to 22nd

Respondents were recruited between the period of 1995 to 2000, as Office Assistants of the

Petitioner’s employment cadre, and placed them as Class S-IV Officers. However, in due course,

they were promoted to the position of Class S-I Officers with effect from 22nd September 2004.

According to the record, by the Chairman’s Circular dated 12th March 2012, the applications were

invited to fill up the vacancies in the Administrative Officers Class M-VI; it was to be filled only

with internal officers of the cadre. Accordingly, a hundred and fourteen employees were shortlisted

for the interview, and out of them, only fifty-three employees who had scored more than the fifty

three percent cutoff mark, were recruited. Subsequently, certain employees had filed Fundamental

Rights applications, but unsuccessful. Thereafter, some of them who had scored marks between

50 and 53 percent were also absorbed.

On further appeal, by the 2nd to 4th Respondents, an Employment Grievance Committee was set up

to further redress; thereafter, on recommendation of the said Committee, more employees were

absorbed into the cadre of Class M-VI, depending on the availability of vacancies.

However, the 4th to 22nd Respondents were not absorbed into the Class M-VI cadre with effect

from 05.04.2012. Therefore, a dispute had arisen, and the matter was referred to Arbitration by the

2nd Respondent in terms of Section 4 of the Industrial Dispute Act, No. 43 of 1950 (as amended).

After an inquiry, the 1st Respondent (the Arbitrator), had delivered the arbitral award in favour of

the 4th to 22nd Respondents, marked as X10 annexed to the Petition, and the same was published

by the Gazette marked as X12. Therefore, the Petitioner is seeking to invoke the writ jurisdiction

of this Court, challenging X10 and X12, to quash the same.

8

The facts mentioned above are not disputed; therefore, now I will consider the relevant evidence

that had transpired in the course of the arbitral proceedings, to deal with the real issue of this

Application.

Relevant evidence before the Arbitrator

Before the arbitrator, the 4th Respondent only has given evidence for and on behalf of the Claimants

as the 1st Party, and she has marked the documents as A1 to A22, and she was subject to cross-

examination. It was her position that she and the other Respondents (4th to 22nd Respondents) were

all recruited as Office Assistants from 1995 to 2004. Later, they were promoted, and after ten years

of service, they were eligible to apply for administrative posts. In 2011, the Petitioner

(Employment Bureau) had advertised calling for applications; accordingly, the 4th to 22nd

Respondents along with other employees had submitted their applications, and through an

interview, fifty-three candidates were selected; the 4th to 22nd Respondents were not selected.

Therefore, they had filed Fundamental Rights applications which were unsuccessful.

Thereafter, they had made an appeal, and on the appeal, this matter was referred to a Special

Grievance Committee, who made a recommendation after an inquiry to redress their grievances.

Thereafter, the Minister referred the matter to the Arbitrator.

The 4th to 22nd Respondents’ grievance is that although some of them were later absorbed into the

administrative Class M-VI cadre with effect from 04.10.2018, their appointment should have been

made with effect from 2012 along with the other employees who had been absorbed through the

same interview held in 2011. Therefore, they were discriminated.

However, she (the 4th Respondent) admitted that the vacancies were advertised according to the

circular issued by the Chairman of the Foreign Employment Bureau (hereinafter referred to as “the

9

Bureau”), who has to follow the public circulars as well as the Establishment Code. Accordingly,

to be absorbed into the cadre of administrative service as internal officers, such an officer needs to

have at least ten years of experience according to the rules. The 4th to 22nd Respondents were

eligible on that basis; but when they were called for the interview, and some of them were selected

as well. Thus, their grievance was that although they were absorbed, their letters of appointment

were not with effect from the original date 05/04/2012.

In cross-examination she admitted that when they had complained to the Supreme Court by way

of Fundamental Rights applications, which were dismissed on the basis that they had not made out

a prima facie case. She further admitted that, although they had appealed to the Grievance

Committee, the Committee also had only recommended to give them certain relief or redress their

grievance if it is suitable. Thereafter, only was the matter was referred to arbitration.

Further, she admitted that although it is an internal appointment, the officers can be absorbed into

the cadre depending only on the availability of vacancies; no more vacancies can be created by the

Chairman or Employment Bureau unless it is permitted by the Salary and Cadre Commission.

For further clarity, I will reproduce the relevant part of her evidence (in cross-examination)

reflected in X4(b) annexed to the Petition;

“R (3) පෙන්වා සිටී.

ප්‍ර: R (3) පේඛනපේ අවසන් පේදය කුමක් ද සදහන් වන්පන්? උ: එය කියවා සිටී. ප්‍ර: ඔබ පිළිගන්නවාද පමම අවස්ථාපේදී තනතුර ප්‍රධානය කිරීම පහෝ තනතුර උසස් කිරීපේ දී නීතිමය රාමුවකට බැදිලා කටයුතු කරන්න ඕන කියලා පිළිගන්නවාද? උ: ඔේ. ප්‍ර: ඔබ අවසන් වතාවට දුක් ගැනිවිලි කමිටුවට ඉදිරිෙත් කලා කියලා කීපේ පමම R (3) අනුව ද? උ: ඔේ.

10

ප්‍ර: පමම චක්‍ර පේඛනපේ වැඩිදුරටත් අවදානය පයාමුකර තිපබනවා කිසියේ ෙත්ීමක් පහෝ ගැටළු විසදීපේ තත්වයකට නීතිමය නත්වයක් අවශ්‍ය නේ ඒ අනුව කටයුතු කරන්න ඕන කියලා පිළිගන්නවා ද? උ: ඔේ. ප්‍ර: ඔබ සදහන් කර සිටියා පෙරදානේ කිරීමක් ඉේලා සිටින්පන් නැහැ කියලා? උ: පෙරදා නේ කිරීමක් ඉේලා තිපබනවා. ප්‍ර: එය තවදුරටත් ඉේලා සිටිනවාද? උ: ඔේ. ප්‍ර: ඒ කුමන කාලයට ද? උ: 2012.04.05 දක්වා ප්‍ර: ඇයි එපස් 2012.04.05 පවනකේ පෙරදා නේ කරන්න කියලා ඉේලා සිටින්පන්? උ: චක්‍රපේඛනය අනුව කියා තිපබන්පන් බදවා ගැනීේ සහ උසස් කිරීේ ලබාදීපේ දී අසාධාරණයක් වුණා නේ ඒ සේබන්ධපයන් කමිටුවක් ෙත්කපේ අපි ඒ පවපේ ඉේීමක් කලා 2012.04.05 ට පෙරදා නේ කරලා පදන්න කියලා. අපි දිගින් දිගටම එපස් ඉේලා සිටියා. R (4) පලස සලකුණු කර ඇති පේඛනය නැවනත් R (4) පලස සලකුණු කර ඉදිරිෙත් කර සිටිනවා. ප්‍ර: R (4) පේඛනපේ 6 වන වගන්තිය කියවා සිටින්න? උ: එය කියවා සිටී. ප්‍ර: කවුද එහි අත්සන් කර තිපබන්පන්? උ: නිපයෝජ්‍ය සාමානය අධිකාරී ෙරිොලන. ප්‍ර: කවදද නිකුත් කර තිපබන්පන්? උ: 2013.03.13 ප්‍ර: පමම පේඛනපේ කුමක් ද සදහන් කර තිපබන්පන්? උ: පෙරදා නේ කිරීමක් පලස සදහන් කර තිපබනවා. ප්‍ර: ඔබ ෙරිොලන අංශ්‍පේ වසර 10 ක් පස්වය කලා කීවා පන්ද? උ: ඔේ. ප්‍ර: ආයතන සංග්‍රහපේ පෙරදා නේ කිරීම සේබන්ධපයන් ඔබට අවපබෝධයක් තිපබනවාද? උ: ඔේ.

11

ප්‍ර: ඔබට ආයතන සංග්‍රහය අනුව එපස් සදහන් කරන්න පමම අවස්ථාපේදී මතකයක් තිපබනවාද? ආයතන සංග්‍රහය පෙන්වා සිටී. උ: එය කියවා සිටී. ආයතන සංග්‍රහපේ 2 ෙරිච්පේදපේ 1:10: 2 කියවා සිටී. ප්‍ර: ආයතන සංග්‍රහපේ 1:10:3 කියවා සිටින්න ? උ: එයත් කියවා සිටී. ප්‍ර: එහි සදහන් පවනවා පන්ද පෙරදා නේ කරන දිනය වන විට සියලු සුදුසුකේ සපුරා තිබිය යුතුයි කියලා පන්ද? උ: ඔේ. ප්‍ර: ඒ පවද්දදී ඉේලා සිටි සියලුම ඉේලුේ ේකරුවන් සුදුසුකේ සේපුර්ණ කර තිබුනාද? උ: ඔේ. ප්‍ර: මම ඔබට පයෝජ්‍නා කරනවා අදාල සුදුසුකේ ඒ පවන විට සපුරා තිබුපන් නැහැ කියලා? උ: පිළිගන්පන් නැහැ ප්‍ර: 2012 පවන විට අදාල තනතුපර් පුරප්ොඩු තිබුපන් නැහැ කියලා පයෝජ්‍නා කරනවා? උ: 2012 ඒ නිබුණ පුරප්ොඩු වලට ලබා දුන්නා. ප්‍ර: ආයතන සංග්‍රහපේ 2 ෙරිච්පේදපේ 1: 11 හි පෙරදා නේ පනාකල යුතු අවස්ථා සදහන් පවනවා පන්ද? උ: කියවා සිටී. ප්‍ර: කවර අවස්ථාවලදී ද යන්න සදහන් කර ඇති පකාටස කියවා සිටින්න? උ: එය කියවා සිටී. ප්‍ර: ඔබට පයෝජ්‍නා කරනවා දැනට තනතුර 2018 පවනකේ ලැබිලා තිපබනවා නවත් වසර 6 ක් පෙර දා නේ කපලාත් තවත් නිලධාරීන් පිරිසකට පජ්‍ෂ්ඨත්වය හානි පවනවා කියලා? උ: 2012 ෙැවැති සේමුඛ ෙරීක්ෂණපේ පේෂ්ඨතම නිලධාරීන් නමයි පේ ඉන්පන්. අෙට වඩා ෙහල කාර්යාල කාර්ය සහයක සිටි අයට උසස්ීේ ලබා දුන්නා. Training Instruction අයට ලබා දුන්නා, එන්් පොස්්මන්් ඇසිස්ටන් කියන අයට ලබා දුන්නා. ඒ අය අපිට වඩා ජූනියර් අය. පමතන ඉන්න පිරිස නමයි සීනියර් අය. ප්‍ර: 2012 වසපර් සේමුඛ ෙරීක්ෂණපයන් ඉහලම ලකුණු ලබලා එම තනතුර ලබලා 2012 වසපර් සිට පස්වය සෙයමින් සිටින අය සිටියදී ඔබට 2012 වසරට පෙරදා නේ කරලා දුන්පනාත් එම නිලධාරීන්ට අසාධාරණයක් පවනවා කියලා පයෝජ්‍නා කර සිටිනවා? උ: නැහැ

12

A (1) පේඛනය පෙන්වා සිටී. ප්‍ර: පමම පේඛනය නිකුත් කර තිපබන්පන් කවදාද? උ: 2019.01.21 ප්‍ර: කවුද පමය අත්සන් කර තිපබන්පන්? උ: සභාෙති. ප්‍ර: සභාෙතිතුමාපේ නම කුමක් ද සදහන් වන්පන්? උ: ඒ. ඒ. එේ. හිේේ ප්‍ර: පමම පේරුේකරණපේ ඉේලා සිටිපනත් පමම ලිපිය බලාත්මක කරන්න කියලද? උ: ඔේ ප්‍ර: පමම ලිපිපේ කිසියේ පදෝෂයක් දකිනවාද? උ: නැහැ ප්‍ර: A (1) පේඛනපේ අන්තිම පේදපේ කුමක්ද සදහන් වන්පන්? උ: එය කියවා සිටී. ප්‍ර: එහි සදහන් පවනවා පන්ද විධිමන් උසස් කිරීපේ ලිපියක් ෙසුව නිකු-න්පකපර් කියලා? උ: ඔේ. ප්‍ර: පමම ලිපිය ස්ීර ලිපියක් කියලා කිව හැකිද? උ: තනතුරට ෙන්කරලා ස්ීර ලිපියක් විදියට නමයි දීලා තිපබන්පන්.”

She also admitted that she and the other nineteen Respondents did not have the necessary marks

at the time that they were selected; however, later, some of them were selected.

After she had given her evidence, an administrative officer, Dhanuka Samarakkodi, from the

Foreign Employment Bureau had also given evidence. According to him, by 09.12.2011, there had

been 53 vacancies in the cadre of the Administrative Officers of the Bureau; thus, in 2011, it was

advertised calling for applications to fill the said vacancies internally, and one hundred and

fourteen (114) officers had applied, and they were all called for the interview. However, out of

13

them, initially only 53 officers were absorbed into the cadre as administrative officers, depending

on their merits.

Thereafter, some of the officers who were not selected had filed Fundamental Rights applications;

nevertheless, their applications were dismissed by the Supreme Court. Later, though their matter

was referred to the Grievance Committee, it had also not given any redress except for properly to

give some suitable relief according to the law. Accordingly, certain Respondents who are now

before the Arbitrator were also given appointments in due course, depending on the available

vacancies, with effect from 04.10.2018.

However, their grievance is that their appointments should be backdated with effect from

05.04.2012. It is his position that their appointment letter cannot be backdated due to two reasons.

Firstly, by the time this matter was referred to arbitration, several officers had already retired;

therefore, they cannot be absorbed. Second reason is that there were no vacancies for all as at

05/04/2012.

Accordingly, it is his position that no discrimination was created or meted out to any of the

Respondents who had made applications to the Supreme Court or the Grievance Committee or was

a party before the Arbitrator.

Nevertheless, the Arbitrator having considered all the evidence, has given the arbitral award in

favour of the Respondents, directing the Petitioner (the Bureau) to backdate their letters of

appointment after absorbing them to the Administrative Officers cadre with effect from 05.04.2012.

Thereafter, the Petitioner sought to quash that order as previously mentioned, on the grounds that

were mentioned in the Arguments.

No vacancies in the cadre

14

It is very clear from the evidence of the Petitioner’s officer, who had given evidence on behalf of

the Petitioner as well as the original applicant (4th Respondent), that the Petitioner can only fill a

certain number of vacancies; not even the Chairman nor Minister can give or create vacancies

which is not within the cadre. According to the cadre, at the time that the applications were called

for, there were only 53 vacancies; thus, from and out of the 114 applicants who had applied to be

absorbed and be promoted as Administrative Officers, the first 53 applicants who had scored the

highest marks were eligible to be absorbed, and thus, absorbed.

Arbitral award is ultra vires

However, some more officers were absorbed in due course depending on the vacancies that had

fallen, including some of the Respondents who had also pursued the matter before the Arbitrator.

Therefore, the Arbitrator has failed to consider all that, particularly about the promotions that had

to be filled depending on the availability of vacancies. He has also failed to consider the fact that

if the said letters of appointment are backdated with effect from 05.04.2012, it will exceed the

maximum limit in the number of the cadre; and therefore, such a decision is ultra vires.

Therefore, the Arbitrator’s direction and arbitral award directing the Petitioner (the Bureau) to

backdate the letter of the said officers, cannot be done as it amounts to exceeding the number of

vacancies in the cadre existing at that time. Therefore, the arbitral award to that extent is ultra

vires, and cannot be maintained. As such, it has to be quashed.

However, their grievance was somewhat redressed in due course, including the 4th Respondent,

who had already given evidence. Nevertheless, all the applicants cannot be redressed for the simple

reason that some of them had already retired. By the time they had retired, there were no vacancies

existing within the cadre; thus, the Employment Bureau could not have accommodated or absorbed

15

them into the cadre before their retirement. Therefore, if such an arbitral award is implemented, it

amounts to scuttling of the whole structure of the cadre in the Bureau; thus, the arbitral award

cannot be sustained. Accordingly, I am compelled to issue a Writ of Certiorari, quashing the same.

Conclusion

For the reasons adumbrated above, Writs of Certiorari are issued as prayed for in prayers (c) and

(d) in the Petition. In addition to that, the Writ of Prohibition as prayed for in prayer (e) in the

Petition is also issued. Since X12 cannot be implemented, no cost is ordered.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL