IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Curt Alois Twerenbold,

Royal Park,

No. 115,

Lake Drive,

Rajagiriya.

Petitioner

CASE NO: CA/319/2014/WRIT

Vs.

1. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

2. P. B. Jayasundara,

Secretary to the Treasury,

Colombo 1.

2A. R. H. S. Samarathunga,

Secretary to the Treasury,

Colombo 1.

3. J. P. Priyangani,

Senior Manager for Director

General,

Department of Public Enterprises,

General Treasury,

Colombo 1.

2

4. Senaka Walgampaya P.C.,

Competent Authority of Hotel

Developers Lanka Ltd.,

Board of Investment,

Level 27, West Tower,

World Trade Centre,

Colombo 1.

5. P. Santhirasegaram,

Chairman,

Compensation Tribunal,

Tax Appeals Commission Building,

49/14 Galle Road,

Colombo 3.

6. P. W. Senarathne,

Member,

Compensation Tribunal,

Tax Appeals Commission Building,

49/14 Galle Road,

Colombo 3.

7. Sunil Fernando,

Member,

Compensation Tribunal,

Tax Appeals Commission Building,

49/14 Galle Road,

Colombo 3.

8. M. L. Suresha Tharanga,

Secretary, Compensation Tribunal,

Tax Appeals Commission Building,

49/14 Galle Road,

Colombo 3.

Respondents

3

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Nuwan De Silva for the Petitioner.

Nayomi Kahavita, S.C. for the Respondents.

Argued on: 23.01.2020

Decided on: 19.02.2020

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The Petitioner, a Swiss national, had purchased 139,000 shares

of Hotel Developers (Lanka) PLC. This company was later

acquired/stood vested in the Secretary to the Treasury for and

on behalf of the State, as an underperforming enterprise, in

terms of section 2 of the Revival of Underperforming Enterprises

or Underutilized Assets Act, No. 43 of 2011. According to

section 4 of the Act, the shareholders of the company are

entitled to prompt, adequate and effective compensation from

the State. In addition, the Petitioner states that this transaction

is also governed by the bilateral Agreement marked P2 between

Sri Lanka and the Swiss Confederation, and Article 6 thereof is

relevant in assessing compensation. By and large, the Petitioner

has filed this application on the basis that he has not been paid

compensation promptly, adequately and effectively. To be

specific, the reliefs sought by the Petitioner in the prayer to the

petition are to quash by way of a writ of certiorari the defective

determination made by the 5th-7th Respondents to pay Rs.35 per

share as compensation to him, and to direct the 1st, 4th-7th

Respondents by way of a writ of mandamus to pay

compensation according to law.

Learned counsel for the Petitioner challenges the determination

of the payment of compensation at the rate of Rs.35 per share

4

on several grounds. Of them, the one which challenges the

jurisdiction of the Compensation Tribunal, in my view, goes to

the root of the matter.

Sections 5 and 6(1) of the Act read as follows:

5(1) The Cabinet of Ministers shall appoint, for the purposes

of this Act, a tribunal, to be called the Compensation

Tribunal comprising the Chief Valuer and two other persons

who are persons having wide experience and who have

shown capacity, in commercial valuation.

(2) All claims for the payment of compensation under

subsection (2) of section 4 shall be made to the

Compensation Tribunal appointed under subsection (1)

within a period of two years from the date of vesting.

6(1) The Compensation Tribunal shall on receipt of claim for

the payment of compensation and after such inquiry as it

deems necessary, make its award on such claim within a

period of twelve months from the date on which the claim

was received by it.

According to these two sections, the award after the inquiry in

respect of claims for payment of compensation shall be made by

the Compensation Tribunal, which shall comprise the Chief

Valuer as the Chairman and two other Members.

The Respondents in paragraphs 7 and 8 of their statement of

objections admit that the power to assess the compensation has

been vested with the Compensation Tribunal which is chaired by

the Government Chief Valuer who is named as the 5th Respondent

5

of this case; the other two Members of the Tribunal are named

as the 6th and 7th Respondents.

The fact that the Award is made by the Compensation Tribunal

comprising the 5th-7th Respondents is made abundantly clear by

the public notifications tendered by the Respondents marked R5

and R6. This is reinforced by P10, a letter sent by the Secretary

of the Compensation Tribunal to the Petitioner.

The Respondents in paragraph 11 of their statement of

objections state that the determination of the award of

compensation by the Compensation Tribunal was made on

18.12.2013 [R1], and was communicated to the Petitioner on

19.12.2013 [R2], and the Petitioner, by his letter dated

26.12.2013, had acknowledged the receipt of the award of

compensation [R3].

By paragraph 6 of the counter affidavit the Petitioner has taken

the strong position that if, according to the Respondents, R1 is

the Award, it is illegal and ultra vires, as the Award was made

without the 5th Respondent Chief Valuer, presiding as Chairman

of the Tribunal.

As seen from the last page of R1, the Award or Determination of

Compensation has been made by R.A.R.M.N. Rajakaruna as

Chairman and the 6th and 7th Respondents as Members of the

Compensation Tribunal. It is addressed to the Chief Valuer.

At the argument, learned State Counsel for the Respondents

stated that R1 is only a recommendation made by a Committee

to the Chief Valuer. This is in contradiction to the position

taken by the Respondents in paragraph 20 of the written

submissions, where R1 is referred to as the Award dated 18

6

December 2013. Be that as it may, if this Court accepts the

position of learned State Counsel at the argument, where is the

Award made by the Compensation Tribunal comprising the Chief

Valuer and two other Members? No such Award was tendered at

least at the stage of the argument, notwithstanding this matter

was in the forefront of the counter objections and the written

submissions filed on behalf of the Petitioner.

In the eyes of law, the Award dated 18 December 2013 marked

R1, is not an Award.

There could not have been a fresh Award made by the

Compensation Tribunal with the Chief Valuer as the Chairman

after R1 dated 18.12.2013, because the letter marked R2

informing the Petitioner of the quantum of compensation is

dated 19.12.2013.

Although the Respondents in their statement of objections claim

that the Petitioner by R3 acknowledged the receipt of the award

of compensation notified by letter dated 19.12.2013, a close

scrutiny of R3 reveals that the Petitioner did not consider the

said letter as an Award but as an offer of compensation to be

accepted or rejected by him. The first sentence of R3 says: I

have received your letter of 19th December, and I have to reject

your offer of compensation [for Rs. 4,865,000/=] unless you will

agree that this is a down payment to a later final settlement

without any strings attached.

The Petitioner had not been served with R1 and R1(a)

documents. The Petitioner saw these documents for the first

time when they were tendered by the Respondents with their

statement of objections.

7

In Shell Gas Lanka Ltd. v. Consumer Affairs Authority [2008] 1 Sri

LR 128, the Company came before this Court seeking to quash

by certiorari the decision made by the Consumer Affairs

Authority on the ground of lack of jurisdiction. According to

section 3(4) of the Consumer Affairs Authority Act, No.9 of 2003

read with its Schedule The quorum for any meeting of the

Authority shall be four members. There was no dispute that the

inquiry was held and the impugned order was made by only

three members. This Court set aside the order by certiorari.

Sriskandarajah J. at pages 134 stated:

It is an admitted fact that the inquiry was held by three

inquiring officers and the impugned order marked 2R3(a)

was made by them and they have signed the said Order

which was communicated by the letter dated 31.08.2005

P14. The duty of the court is to see that power shall not be

exercised in unlawful and arbitrary manner, when exercise

of such powers affects the basic rights of individuals. The

courts should be alert to see that such powers conferred by

the statute are not exceeded or abused. The Authority is

constituted by at least four members sitting together (the

quorum). In the absence of a quorum for the meeting of the

members of the Authority to hold and inquiry and to make

an Order is devoid of any legal effect. Hence this court

issues a writ of certiorari to quash the said order

communicated to the Petitioner by letter dated 31.08.2004

marked P14. The application for writ of certiorari is allowed

without costs.1

1 Vide also the leading case of Paul v. Wijerama (1972) 75 NLR 361.

8

In the instant case, it is clear that (a) there is no Award as

contemplated by section 6(1) of the Act, and (b) the purported

Award marked R1 (insofar as the Petitioner is concerned) was

not made by a legally constituted Tribunal.

The pivotal argument of learned State Counsel for the

Respondents is that this application of the Petitioner shall be

dismissed in limine as the Petitioner has not, in terms of section

6(2) of the Act, exercised his right of appeal against the

determination of the Tribunal.

Section 6(2) of the Act runs as follows:

Any person who is aggrieved by an award made by the

Compensation Tribunal may appeal against such award to

the Court of Appeal within fourteen days from the date on

which the award was communicated to such person, with

the leave of the Court of Appeal first had and obtained. The

provisions of the Civil Procedure Code relating to appeals to

the Court of Appeal from an order of a District Court shall,

mutatis mutandis, apply to the making and hearing of

appeals under this section.

According to this section, for the appeal procedure to be

invoked, three requirements shall be consummated:

(a) There shall be an Award;

(b) The Award shall be made by the Compensation

Tribunal;

(c) The Award shall be communicated to the party entitled

to the Award.

9

It is against an Award made in keeping with the above

requirements that an aggrieved party may prefer an appeal with

leave obtained from this Court.

In the facts and circumstances of this case, I take the view that

these three conditions have not been satisfied. Firstly, there is

no Award; secondly, even if there is one, it has not been made by

a properly constituted Compensation Tribunal; and, thirdly, a

valid Award has not been communicated to the Petitioner. In

the eyes of law, the purported Award or Determination of

Compensation dated 18.12.2013 contained in R1, insofar as the

Petitioner is concerned, is a nullity, as it has not been made by a

legally constituted Tribunal due to lack of quorum.

The proper forum to canvass lack of jurisdiction or vires of the

purported Tribunal is the Court of Appeal by invoking the writ

jurisdiction of this Court.

Learned State Counsel contends that this jurisdictional

objection could have been taken also on appeal. Even assuming

so, that does not prevent the Petitioner from invoking the writ

jurisdiction of this Court to challenge the decision.

In other words, it is the submission of learned State Counsel

that when there is an alternative remedy, such as right of

appeal, writ does not lie.

The general rule is that when there is an alternative remedy, the

Court will not readily exercise writ jurisdiction. But that is not

an inflexible or absolute rule. This is equally true in respect of

revision applications.

10

This has been conceded by learned State Counsel in paragraphs

23 and 24 of the written submissions of the Respondents.

Paragraph 23 reads:

In the case of Rasheed Ali v Mohomed Ali and others 1981

1SLR 262, the Supreme Court held that when a statute

provides a remedy to an aggrieved party, the Court will not

interfere by way of judicial review, unless it can be shown

that non-inference will cause a grave denial of justice and a

irreparable harm. However, such grave denial of justice and

harm should not be attributable to a cause to which the

aggrieved party through his or her inaction is directly

responsible such as the Petitioner in the instant case.

I accept the first sentence, but not the second. The denial of

justice to the Petitioner did not occur due to any action or

inaction on the part of the Petitioner.

The Petitioner in fact had filed a civil case (DMR/2251/2013)

against the 1st and 2nd Respondents to this case in the District

Court on unjust enrichment. But, as seen from P11, the said

case had been dismissed on a preliminary objection taken by the

1st Respondent that after an Award is made, the District Court

has no jurisdiction to entertain the action. The Petitioner in

paragraph 39 of the petition states that he received the letter

marked P12 informing him of the quantum of compensation

after filing action in the District Court. The Petitioner has not

been sleeping over his rights.

Paragraph 24 of the Respondents written submissions reads:

11

Further in the case of Halwan and others v Kaleelul

Rahuman 2000 3 SLR 50, it has been held by the Court of

Appeal that when a statue provides a specific remedy for

an aggrieved party, and such party without invoking such

remedy seeks judicial review by a way of a writ, the

application for a prerogative writ should specify an

explanation supported by an Affidavit as to why the

statutorily granted remedy was not canvassed. The

Petitioner in the instant writ application had neither

pleaded nor provided an explanation for not filing an

Appeal against the award of compensation within the

relevant time frame in the Act.

The argument that the Petitioner had neither pleaded nor

provided an explanation for not filing an Appeal against the

award of compensation within the relevant time frame in the Act,

is unacceptable. The Petitioner in paragraphs 36 and 37 of the

petition, which I quote below, has given an explanation which is

acceptable to this Court.

36. The Petitioner states that Section 6(2) of the said

Revival of Underperforming Enterprises of Under Utilized

Assets Act No.43 of 2011 requires any person who is

aggrieved by an Award made by the Compensation

Tribunal to appeal against such Award to the Court of

Appeal within fourteen days from the date on which the

Award was communicated to such person, with first

obtaining leave of the Court of Appeal.

37. The Petitioner states that the Petitioner has not received

any Award at the moment when this application is being

filed, and that the Petitioner is unable to act under the

12

above mentioned Section 6(2) of the said Revival of

Underperforming Enterprises of Under Utilized Assets Act

No.43 of 2011 without an Award being communicated to

the Petitioner.

Even if there were an Award and also a right of appeal, there is

no positive legal bar preventing the Petitioner from coming

before this Court by way of judicial review challenging the

Award. In Sirisena v. Registrar of Co-operative Societies (1949) 41

CLW 1 at 2 Gratian J. held:

It is no doubt a well recognised principle of law that a

Superior Court will not as a rule make an order of

mandamus or certiorari where there is an alternative and

equally convenient remedy available to the aggrieved party.

But the rule is not a rigid one. In Rex vs. Wandsworth

Justicesex parte Reid (1942) 1 A.E.R. 56, an application

was made for an order of certiorari quashing a conviction

made by the justices in excess of their jurisdiction.

Objection was taken, inter alia, that as the accused had a

right of appeal to quarter sessions, certiorari did not lie.

Caldecote L.J., in over-ruling the objection, said as to the

right of appeal to quarter sessions, it may be that the

applicant could have had his remedy if he had pursued that

course, but I am not aware of any reason why, in such

circumstances as these, if the applicant prefers to ask for

an order of certiorari to quash the conviction obtained in the

manner I have described, the Court should be debarred

from making an order. In this case it has been admitted

that a mistake has occurred. This Court is in a position to

remedy that mistake by making an order of certiorari to

13

quash the conviction, and that it is the proper order which I

think this Court should make. Humphreys J. in a separate

judgement expressed the view that if a person can satisfy

this Court that he has been convicted of a criminal offence,

as the result of a complete disregard by the tribunal of the

laws of natural justice, he is entitled to the protection of this

Court even though an alternative remedy was also

available. I think that these observations are appropriate

to the present proceedings. It is not in dispute that a public

officer and an extrajudicial tribunal, acting no doubt

through ignorance, have flagrantly exceeded the limited

statutory powers conferred on them by the provisions of the

Co-operative Societies Ordinance. In the result there is on

record an illegal award condemning a man to pay to a

public institution the amount of a disputed claim upon

which only a Court of law is normally competent to

adjudicate. I consider that there is no compelling principle of

law which fetters this Courts discretion to quash the illegal

award, and I now make order accordingly.

In the Supreme Court case of Somasunderam Vanniasinghsm v.

Forbes [1993] 2 Sri LR 362, Bandaranayake J. (later C.J.) citing

an array of authorities has clearly held that existence of

alternative remedies does not preclude unlawful orders being

challenged by judicial review. In the course of the Judgment at

page 367 the following excerpt of Wade in Administrative Law

(5th Edition) page 593 has been cited:

There is no rule requiring what is called the exhaustion of

administrative remedies.one aspect of the rule of law is

that illegal administrative action can be challenged in the

14

Court as soon as it is taken or threatened. There is

therefore no need to pursue any administrative procedure

or appeal in order to see whether the action in the end will

be taken or not. An administrative appeal on the merits is

something quite different from judicial determination of the

legality of the whole matter. This restates the essential

difference between review and appeal....The Court may

(however) withhold discretionary remedies where the most

convenient step is to appeal.

Connected to the availability of alternative remedy, learned State

Counsel further states that there has been a delay in filing this

application, which also warrants dismissal of the application at

the threshold level. At paragraph 35 of the Respondents written

submissions, learned State Counsel submits that Since a

mandate in the nature of a writ is a prerogative remedy based on

just an equitable principles, delay is oft regarded as defeating

justice and equity, which in turn obligates the party invoking such

a remedy to act without undue delay which the Petitioner had

failed to do so and cites the Supreme Court case of Biso Menika

v. Cyril de Alwis [1982] 1 Sri LR 368 in support.

There is no time frame within which a party aggrieved by an

administrative or judicial decision shall invoke writ jurisdiction.

It shall be invoked within a reasonable time. What constitutes

reasonable time shall be decided on the unique facts and

circumstances of each individual case.

In any event, if the decision is challenged on the basis that the

Tribunal which made the impugned decision did so without

jurisdiction, and if the Court is satisfied that such complaint is

15

well-founded, the Court shall not dismiss the application on

delay.

In Biso Manikas case, Sharvananda, J. (later C.J.), at page 379

stated:

An application for a Writ of Certiorari should be filed within

a reasonable time from the date of the Order which the

applicant seeks to have quashed. What is reasonable time

and what will constitute undue delay will depend upon the

facts of each particular case. However the time lag that can

be explained does not spell laches or delay. If the delay can

be reasonably explained, the Court will not decline to

interfere. The delay which a Court can excuse is one which

is caused by the applicant pursuing a legal remedy and not

a remedy which is extra-legal. One satisfactory way to

explain the delay is for the Petitioner to show that he has

been seeking relief elsewhere in a manner provided by the

Law.

When the Court has examined the record and is satisfied

the Order complained of is manifestly erroneous or without

jurisdiction the Court would be loath to allow the mischief of

the Order to continue and reject the application simply on

the ground of delay, unless there are very extraordinary

reasons to justify such rejection. Where the authority

concerned has been acting altogether without basic

jurisdiction, the Court may grant relief in spite of the delay

unless the conduct of the party shows that he has

approbated the usurpation of jurisdiction. In any such

event, the explanation of the delay should be considered

sympathetically.

16

Recent practice clearly indicates that where the

proceedings were a nullity an award of Certiorari will not

readily be deniedde SmithJudicial Review4th Ed.

page 426.

In this connection Professor Wade in his Administrative

Law 4th Ed. at page 561 states: the discretion to withhold

remedy against unlawful action may make inroads upon

the rule of Law and must therefore be exercised with the

greatest care. In any normal case the remedy accompanies

the right, but the fact that a person aggrieved is entitled to

Certiorari ex debito justitiae does not alter the fact that a

Court has power to exercise the discretion against him, as it

may in the case of any discretionary remedy.

Unlike in English Law or in our Law there is no statutory

time limit within which a petition for the issue of a Writ

must be filed. But a rule of practice has grown which insists

upon such petition being made without undue delay. When

no time limit is specified for seeking such remedy, the Court

has ample power to condone delays, where denial of Writ to

the Petitioner is likely to cause great injustice. The Court

may therefore in its discretion entertain the application in

spite of the fact that a Petitioner comes to Court late, -

especially where the Order challenged is a nullity for

absolute want of jurisdiction in the authority making the

order.

Finally, learned State Counsel argued that the Petitioner came

before this Court challenging only the quantum of damages and

therefore has no right now to challenge the Award. I am afraid, I

am unable to agree. Even now the Petitioners grievance is that

17

he has not been adequately compensated in terms of law. This

he emphasises by showing that there is no legally tenable Award

made by a properly constituted Compensation Tribunal. His

complaint is that had his claim been considered by a properly

considered Compensation Tribunal in terms of section 4 of the

Act and Article 6 of the Agreement marked P2, he would have

been entitled to enhanced compensation.

Before I conclude let me touch upon the applicability of P2. P2

is the bilateral Agreement entered into between the two

countriesSri Lanka and the Swiss Confederation.

Article 12(2) of P2, under the heading Entry into force, Duration

and Termination, states as follows:

This Agreement shall remain in force for a period of ten

years. Thereafter it shall continue in force until the

expiration of twelve months from the date on which either

Contracting Party shall have given written notice of

termination to the other. Provided that in respect of

investment made whilst the Agreement is in force, its

provisions shall continue in effect with respect to such

investments for a period of ten years after the date of

termination and without prejudice to the application

thereafter of the rules of general international law.

According to this Article, the Agreement is effective for 10 years.

After the lapse of 10 years, it can be terminated by either party

by giving written notice to the other party, in which event, the

termination will take effect 12 months after the date of the said

notice.

18

No such written notice of termination was tendered by the

Respondents to this Court. Conversely, the Petitioner with his

counter objections has tendered a letter dated 10.09.2015

marked X1, issued by the Ambassador to the Swiss

Confederation, whereby the Swiss Embassy in Colombo confirms

the validity of the said Agreement.

Hence I am unable to accept the argument of the Respondents

(taken up at paragraph 38 of the written submissions) that the

Petitioners investment is not protected by the said [Agreement]

because the [Agreement] was valid for ten years from 1981 and

the Petitioners investment was outside the said period.

I am aware that the Revival of Underperforming Enterprises or

Underutilized Assets Act, No.43 of 2011 was repealed by Act

No.12 of 2019. If there are practical difficulties, let the parties

arrive at an amicable settlement. As this Court has not been

addressed on that aspect, I make no directions in that regard.

For the aforesaid reasons, I quash the decision contained in the

letter sent by the Secretary to the Compensation Tribunal to the

Petitioner dated 19.12.2013 marked P12/R2, and direct the 1st

Respondent by way of a writ of mandamus to take steps to make

prompt, adequate and effective compensation in terms of section

4 of the Act and Article 12 of the Agreement P2.

The Petitioner is entitled to costs of the application.

Judge of the Court of Appeal