I 1 I I I I

}

l I , I

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under Section 754 of the Civil Procedure Code

Korallage Edward Ranasinghe 'of Morawatta, Ruwanwella.

Plaintiff - Appellant D.C. Avissawella Case No. 154/P

Vs.

1. Ranasinghe Arachchige Dingiri Mahatmaya 2. Korallage Ariyawathie Ranasinghe 3. Korallage Shirani Ranasinghe 4. Korallage Doreen Chandra Ranasinghe 5. Korallage Margaret Sheila Ranasinghe 6. Korallage Anulawathie Ranasinghe -All of Morawatta, Ruwanwella 7. Mahinda Meedeniya of Mudugamuwa, Ruwanwella.

Defendants - Respondents

BEFORE: M.M.A. GAFFOOR J

COUNSEL:

S. DEVIKA DE LIVERA TENNEKOON J

Vidura Gunaratne with P.D.R.J.U. de Almeida for the Plaintiff - Appellant Athula Perera with Chaturani de Silva for the

7th Defendant - Respondent

t

1

2

ARGUED ON: 27.03.2017

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS -Plaintiff - Appellant - 02.02.2012 &

31.08.2016

7th Defendant - Respondent - 04.04.2013

DECIDED ON: 10.08.2017

S. DEVIKA DE LIVERA TENNEKOON J

The Plaintiff - Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant) instituted action

in the District Court of A vissawella to have the land described in the schedule

partitioned between the Appellant and the 15t - i h Defendant - Respondents

(hereinafter referred to as the Respondents) as per the shares mentioned in the

Plaint dated 04.11.1986.

The i h Respondent in his statement of claim dated 26.01.1990 took up the position

that the land sought to be partitioned called "Attikkagahaowita" is a portion of a

land called "Hamunawele Owitawatta" which belonged to the i h Respondent and

as such the Appellant and the 15t - 6th Respondents have no right over the corpus.

Trial commenced in this case on 03.05 .l994 and issues 1 - 6 were recorded on

behalf of the Appellant and issues 7 -14 were recorded on behalf of the

Respondents and no admissions were recorded. Issues 12 -14 were raised on

behalf of the i h Respondent. Upon the conclusion of the trail the learned District

Judge pronounced judgment on 29.01.1999 dismissing the Plaint of the Appellant.

III

I 1 I I I

3

Being aggrieved by the said judgment the Appellant preferred the instant appeal on

two main grounds;

a) A period of more than 3 years has elapsed between the conclusion of the

case and the pronouncement of the impugned judgment,

b) The Commissioner who prepared the preliminary plan marked as 'X'

bearing No. 1553 has not adequately complied with the Section 18(1) (a) iii

of the Partition Act and therefore not identified the corpus.

Before considering the merits of the instant Appeal I must first consider whether

the delay caused in delivering the impugned judgment should result in the

judgment been set aside. It must be noted however, that the Petition of Appeal of

the Appellants does not contain a prayer for trial de novo and only prays to set

aside the said judgment.

On an examination of the journal entries at trial it seems that that judgment was

first fixed for 24.11.1995 and was only delivered on 29.01.1999 and as correctly

submitted by the learned Counsel for the Appellant the pronouncement of the

judgment was delayed for not less than three years.

The learned Counsel for the Appellant relies on the case of Tikiri Menika V s.

Dionis 7 NLR 337 in which it was held by Grenier, A. J that;

'This case must go back for a new trial. In the first place, I find that Mr.

Carbery was functus officio at the time he delivered judgment in this case.

Had the judgment been written by him during his tenure of office, it would

I

rtIII

JI I

I I I

4

have been competent for his successor to have delivered it; but he seems to

have written out his judgment after he had ceased to be Commissioner, and I

do not think the consent of the parties served to make the judgment valid.

On another ground also, I think it advisable, although I much regret it, that

there should be a new trial. Even if I consider Mr. Carbery's judgment a

valid one, he has not dealt with the points in issue between the parties, and

has pronounced no finding of a definite character. All he says is that the

evidence as to possession on both sides is confusing and contradictory, and

that on the paper title plaintiff has made out a good case. This is not a

judicial pronouncement, upon the issues framed by him. The judgment

appears to have been written in a hurry, and nearly two months after the case

on both sides had been closed. '

The learned Counsel for the Appellant also relies on the case of Kulatunga Vs.

Samaranayake 1990 (1) SLR 244 where judgment was delivered two years and

four months after the written submissions were tendered to Court. It was held inter

alia that;

'I am of the view that the appellate court cannot place the same reliance on

findings of fact made after such a long delay. The learned judge was bound

to have lost the advantage of the impressions created by the witnesses whom

he saw and heard and his recollection of the fine points in the case would

have faded from his memory by the time he comes to write the judgment.'

~

r

t1

I 1 ! 5

Upon examining the impugned judgment it is clear that the said judgment was

delivered in a hurry nearly three years after the parties filed written submissions.

This Court, however, must also be mindful of the additional delay which would be

caused to the parties if the instant case is directed for a re - trial and therefore

would only consider such remedy if it can be seen that grave injustice- has been

caused to the Appellant by the delay in pronouncing the impugned judgment.

The Counsel for the Appellant contends that the Commissioner who prepared the

preliminary plan marked as 'X' bearing No. 1553 has not adequately complied

with the Section 18( 1 ) (a) iii of the Partition Act.

The Commissioner who prepared the said preliminary plan was called to gIve

evidence on 14.09.1994 and it seems that the inadequacy complained of by the

Appellant was brought to the notice of the said Commissioner in re - examination

(vide pages 76 & 77 of the Appeal Brief). When re - examined on this the

Commissioner says he cannot indicate with certainty whether what is depicted in

the said plan is the corpus.

Section 18 of the Partition Act reads;

"( 1) The surveyor shall duly execute the commission issued to him and, in

doing so shall, where any boundary of the land surveyed by him is

undefined, demarcate that boundary on the ground by means of such

boundary marks as are not easily removed or destroyed and shall, on or

before the date fixed for the purpose, make due return thereto and shall

transmit to the court-

fJII

J

\

I

6

(a) a report, in duplicate, substantially in the fonn set out III the

Second Schedule to this Law, verified by affidavit stating-

(i) the dates on which notice of survey was issued to the parties;

(ii) the nature of the land surveyed and of any buildings, walls,

wells, trees, plantations, fences and other improvements

thereon;

(iii) whether or not the land surveyed by him is in his opinion

substantially the same as the land sought to be partitioned as

described in the schedule to the plaint;

Attention is drawn to the wording of the Section relied upon by the Appellants

which states that the commissioner shall state is opinion as to whether the land

surveyed by him is the same land which ought to be partitioned. The

Commissioner has answered the above provision as clause 5 of his report which

states;

According to the Plaint it is the land described in the Schedule

According to the i h Defendant it is Hamunawele Owitawatta (A portion of)

This Court takes the view that the above description which has been reaffinned by

oral evidence is sufficient compliance of Section 18(1) (a) iii of the Partition Act as

it is seen as an expression of opinion and not a finding of fact.

II

I

7

Further, it seems that the Appellant had complained of this alleged inadequacy at

the trial stage but had failed to take steps to rectify this omISSIOn under the

provisions of the Partition Act.

Section 18 (3) of the Partition Act reads;

(a) Notwithstanding anything in subsection (2) of this section, the court,

either of its own motion or on the application of a party to the action, may,

before using the copy of the surveyor's field notes and the plan, cause them

to be verified and to be certified as correct or, where such field notes and

plan are incorrect, cause fresh field notes and a fresh plan to be made

by the Surveyor-General or by any officer of his department authorized by

him in that behalf, and may for that purpose issue a commission to the

Surveyor-General.

In the absence of the proper steps by the Appellant to rectify the alleged omission

by Commissioner this Court cannot agree with the contention of the Appellant that

the Commissioner who prepared the preliminary plan marked as 'X' bearing No.

1553 has not adequately complied with the Section 18(1) (a) iii of the Partition

Act.

It is apparent that this is the only finding of fact contended by the Appellant the

other contention being raised concerning the delay of pronouncing the judgment.

8

This Court is of the view that cases such as this, where the impugned judgment has

been delayed, are the exception and not the rule, therefore, when considering

whether grave injustice has been caused to the Appellant by the delay in

pronouncing the impugned judgment warranting a trial de novo one must

deliberate on a case by case basis.

The impugned judgment was pronounced on 29.01.1999 the instant judgment is

pronounced on 10.08.2017 which is over 18 years since the date of pronouncement

of the said judgment. It is true that there is an unexplained delay not less than three

years in pronouncing the impugned judgement. Having taken into account all

relevant factors this Court is not inclined to allow the instant Appeal as a grave

injustice has not been caused to the Appellant as aforementioned.

In the circumstances as morefully described above I see no reason to allow the

instant Appeal.

Appeal Dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

M.M.A. GAFFOOR J

I Agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

, !

Il,

t!I