IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

Court of Appeal Case No:

CAlPHCI APN/119119

HC Homagama Case No:

HCfREV/37/2019

MC Kesbewa Case No: 91561

Page 1 of 13

In the matter of an application for a Revision under and in terms of Section

II (I) of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990.

Vs.

Officer - in - Charge, Police Station, Piliyandala.

Kitnan Rajendran, Murutenna Watta, Koththellena, Hatton.

Plaintiff

Accused

AND BETWEEN

Vs.

Kitnan Rajendran, Murutenna Watta, Koththellena, Hatton.

Accused - Petitioner

Officer - in - Charge,

Piliyandala.

BEFORE

COUNSEL

1" Respondent

Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

2nd Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

Vs.

Kitnan Rajendran, Murutenna Walta, Koththellena, Hatton.

Accused - Petitioner - Petitioner

Officer - in - Charge,

Police Station, Piliyandala.

1" Respondent

Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

2nd Respondent

K. K. Wickremasinghe, J.

Devika Abeyratne, J.

Mr. Ashan Nanayakkara AAL and Ms. Subhani

Abeysekere AAL instructed by Mr. Ani 1

Bandara AAL for the Accused Petitioner

Page 2 of 13

ARGUED ON

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

DECIDED ON

K.K.WICKREMASINGHE, J.

Ms. Maheshika Silva SSC for the Respondent

12.06.2020

Due Date - 05.08. 2020

Date of File by Respondent - 14.08.2020 (not

filed on the due date)

08.09.2020

The Accused-Petitioner-Petitioner (hereinafter referred to as the Petitioner) has filed this

revision application seeking to revise the order of the Learned High Court Judge of

Homagama dated 04.09.2019 in case No. HC/REV/3712019 and also to revise the order of the

Learned Magistrate of Kesbewa dated 29.07.20 12, 02.07.2019 and 19.05.20 19 in case No.

91561.

FACTS OF THE CASE

The Petitioner was the Accused of a motor accident that had taken place in Piliyandala -

Colombo bus route (near Kesbewa traffic lights) on 07.06.2019. The said accident was a

collision of a Lorry with a Motor Cycle and due to the accident the motor cyclist was

severely injured and succumbed to his injuries while being taken to the hospital. The charge

sheet in the Magistrate's Court contained 5 counts as follows:

I. Culpable Homicide not amounting to murder

2. Failure to avoid an accident

3. Reckless driving

4. Driving under the influence ofliquor

5. Driving a vehicle which is not roadworthy

Page 3 of 13

The Petitioner pleaded not guilty for each and eveD' count and the case was fixed for trial.

When the case was fixed for trial, the Attorney - at - Law on behalf of the Petitioner has

pleaded guilty for aforementioned charges. The Petitioner alleged that the Attorney - at -

Law for the Petitioner had pleaded guilty without the instructions of the Petitioner. Also the

Petitioner submitted that the applicant is a native Tamil Language speaker and was unable to

understand the discussion between the Learned Magistrate and the Attorney - at - Law. Soon

after the particular incident the Petitioner has filed an Affidavit with the instructions of

another Attorney - at - Law stating that the plea of guilty was without the knowledge of the

Petitioner. However the Learned Additional Magistrate of Kesbewa rejected the application

and proceeded to convict the Petitioner and sentenced by his order dated 29.07.2019 marked

as P7. Being aggrieved by the said order of the Learned Additional Magistrate, the Petitioner

filed a revision application in the Provincial High Court of Homagama and the Learned High

Court Judge of Homagama refused to issue notice to the Respondents by his order dated

04.09.201 9. Being aggrieved by the said order the Petitioner filed the instant revision

application to invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of this court.

LEGAL ANALYSIS

The following grounds were submitted and urged as the exceptional circumstances to invoke

the revisionary jurisdiction of this Court by the Learned Counsel for the Petitioner.

1. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to consider the fact that the death of the

deceased was due to the accident.

2. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to consider Section 182 (I) of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act, No 15 of 1979 which stipulates that there should be

sufficient grounds for proceeding against an accused.

Page 4 of 13

3. The Learned High Court Judge has failed tO,consider that the Petitioner convicted for

the 5'h charge is a total fabrication of the story.

4. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to consider that the charge sheet been read

out to the petitioner despite the lack of understanding of what the charges were.

5. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to consider that Section 182 (2) of the Code

of Criminal Procedure Act, No 15 of 1979 and the ratio decidendi of the line of cases

decided in Sri Lanka.

6. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to consider that the Petitioner is protected

by the Language rights in Article 24(3) of the Constitution.

7. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to consider that the conviction was against

the principle of "Unconditional Plea of Guilt".

8. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to consider that the affidavit of the

Petitioner dated 15.07.2019 itself is a gesture of unconditional plea of guilt.

9. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to consider that the Attorney - at - Law for

the Petitioner.

10. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to consider that the Learned Additional

Magistrate had failed to do any inquiry from the Petitioner at the point of convicting

the Petitioner to such a grave offence as culpable homicide not amounting to murder.

II. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to consider that there is no such

requirement that Petitioner must establish very strong evidence to dispute the plea of

guilt inasmuch as the Petitioner has already filed an affidavit challenging the plea of

guilt.

12. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to consider that the Petitioner has no other

means of informing the Courts that the Attorney - at - Law has acted contrary to the

in ... trl,,..t; l"\ n c:o ("'I'i"o..-. <:- ; .... ,..0. ........ AH ........ ..... , ..... T ~~ . . :11 _ : .. ___ .:..J _ _ __ : _ _ ......::_: __ ... ! __ L :._ .. . .... ___ .. ..... ...... 0' ............................. u .. n ........ J ....... -................... "'1.1.1 cr" ........ .,11..1.\.111 .... "" IJJ"'I.u.11Ul(1Ll.ll~ IUIIl.

Page 5 of 13

[ wish to analyze the two fundamental questions of I,aw before this Court as follows;

I. Adherence to Section 182 and 183 o(the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of

1979.

In considering the said question of law, it is a requirement under the law that before the

commencement of the trial the charge should be duly read over to the Accused as enumerated

in Section 182 and 183 of the of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979. I wish

to reproduce the aforesaid sections as follows;

Section 182

(1) Where the accused is brought or appears before the court the Magistrate shall if

there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused, frame a charge against

the accused.

(2) The Magistrate shall read such charge to the accused and ask him if he has any

cause to show why he should not be convicted.

Section 183 stipulates that an unqualified admission is recorded and the procedure adopted

therein;

If the accused upon being asked if he has any cause to show why he should not be

convicted makes a statement which amounts to an unqualified admission that he is

guilty of the offence of which he is accused, his statement shall be recorded as nearly

as possible in the words used by him; and the Magistrate shall record a verdict of

guilty and pass sentence upon him according to law and shall record such sentence:

Provided that the accused may with the leave of the Magistrate withdraw his plea of

guilt at any time before sentence is passed upon him, and in that event the Magistrate

shall proceed to trial as if a conviction has not been entered.

Page 6 of 13

But anything herein contained shall not prev.ent the Magistrate from taking in manner

hereinafter provided the evidence of the prosecution and of such of the witnesses for

the defence as may be present, and then, subject to the provisions of subsection (3) of

section 263 for reasons to be recorded by him in writing adjourning the trial for a day

to be fixed by him.

Under Section 182 (2) the Magistrate should read the Charge to the Accused and ask him

whether he has any cause to show as to why he should not be convicted. In response to it, if

the accused makes a statement which amounts to an unqualified admission that he is guilty of

the offence which he is accused of, his statement shall be recorded then and there in the same

words used by him. Thereafter, the Magistrate shall record a verdict of guilt and pass the

sentence upon him according to law and shall record such sentence in light of Section 183.

When considering the above mentioned sections, it is evident that the Learned Magistrate

should record what the accused had stated in his own words. Specially plea of guilt should

come from the mouth of the accused person and not the Attorney - at - Law.

There should be proof to the satisfaction of the Court that the accused person has understood

what the offence was and also the language. Further it has to be recorded. The above facts

should be transpired from the case record.

At this juncture, [ wish to draw my attention to the line of decided cases by the Courts of Sri

Lanka that provides persuasive authority to the instant application. The development of the

Law relating to framing of charges discussed at length by Bertram CJ in the celebrated

judgment in Cooray Vs James Appu reported in 22 New Law Report 206. The judgment at

page 213, states as follows;

Page 7 of 13

"The Legislature, deliberately departing fr.om the previous practice, had declared

[hat in every summary trial, when once the Court has decided to undertake it, there

shall be from the commencement a definite written charge, which should be read to

the accused, 5pecifying precisely what he has to meet. This charge may be the subject

of reference at any point in the trial, and must be the basis of any ultimate

consideration of the case by the Court of Appeal.

Such a provision may well be regarded as of so fundamental and all-pervading a

character, that its non-observance ought not to be treated as a mere irregularity. No

doubt there may be cases in which the facts may be so simple, the issues so plain, and

the charge so inevitable that it cannot make the smallest difference to the accused

whether a written charge is read to him or not. Nevertheless, it is easy to see that

some provisions may in the intention of the Legislature be of the very essence of the

proceedings, while others may be in the nature of formalities. The existence of a

deliberately framed written charge is obviously a condition which may well be so

regarded, whatever the circumstances of the particular case. "

The intention of the legislature is well explained by the above mentioned case.

In Abdul Sameem V. The Bribery Commissioner 1991 1 SLR 76, the Court considered the

consequences of the failure to frame a charge. The case of Abdul Sameem V. The Bribery

Commissioner concerns the institution of proceedings under Section 136(1) (b) of the Code,

on a written report by the Bribery Commissioner to the Magistrate that the accused

committed certain offences under the Bribery Act. The accused appeared on summons. The

Magistrate adopted the said report by placing a seal. It was held that that there was a failure

to frame a charge by the Magistrate as required under Section 182(1) and read it to accused as

Page 8 of 13

charge, as required under Section 182(1) is a v,iolation of a fundamental principle of

criminal procedure, and is not a defect curable under Section 436 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

In the case of Godage and Others Vs. Officer-In-Charge, Police Station, Kahawatte - Sri

Lanka Law Reports- 1992 - Volume 1, at page 54, a similar question was considered by

this Court which decided the duty of the Magistrate under Section 182 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act as being imperative whilst endorsing the view expressed by Dr

Asoka Gunawardena J in the case of Abdul Sameem (supra). In Godage(supra) the learned

Magistrate convicted the accused but there was no charge found in the case record. Following

the authority in the case of Abdul Sameem( supra), Ismail, J set aside the conviction in

appeal after I 1 years.

Therefore, I emphasize that it is important, that rights of the accused are safeguarded and that

they are brought to trial according to accepted fundamental principles of criminal procedure.

The Counsel for the Petitioner contended that the Learned Additional Magistrate of Kesbewa

had failed to comply with the mandatory requirements of Section 182 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act, by failing to read over the charge to the accused. On a perusal of the

record of the instant case it would appear that the Magistrate bas failed to duly read over the

charge sheet to the Accused.

Page 9 of 13

[wish to draw my attention to the Journal Entry qated 13.02.2019 and 19.05.2019 and it is

reproduced as follows;

Journal Entry dated 13.02.2019

"!Jt:i/tf1tfiJOzD ~[~.&cf@Czri trJ, @tJ:I~z'" o-d6@Gjro @tJ:I~zn, tfiJo@. iiJ5 @tJzri @tJzri

tJ(J;}@Gjzri @@ zf1~o?tfiJOz @D~ Gj[8 tiiGj8. .... "

Journal Entry dated 19.02.2019

"!Jt:i/tf1tfiJOzD 81SJ,8@Gjro @tJ:I~zn, o-d6@Gjro @tJ:I~zn, tfiJO@. iiJ5 @Dzri@DroD(J;}@Gjro@@

zf1D[o?tfiJOz @tJ~ Gj[8 tiiGj8. ... " d6=(J;}Gj '1~D !Jt:i/tf1tfiJOz ~o? tfiJOzDro iiitJD zfJo6,Gj

tfiJO~".

Accordingly, the said two journal entries have no specific reference to a statement where it is

said that the Charge Sheet was read over and explained to the Accused. In the instant case the

Accused person is a native Tamil Language Speaker. There is no reference to say that the

charge sheet was translated to the accused. Therefore [ find it more important to adhere to the

Section 182 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act. Therefore it is evident that the Learned

Magistrate had framed the charge sheet but had failed to read over and explain the contents of

the charge which is laid down in section 182(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.

15 of 1979 and thereby caused an incurable defect in terms of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act.

II. Whether the Charge Sheet was defective

The Leamed Counsel for the Petitioner contented that the Charge Number 05 of the Charge

Sheet is defective. I wish to reproduce the Charge Number 5 as set out in the Charge Sheet

(P2);

Page 10 of 13

The Petitioner submitted that name of the deceased as per Charge number 05 is wrong. Also

both parties have accepted the fact that there was only one death taken place in light of the

accident and the charge sheet comprises of two contradictory positions as to the effect that

two names were mentioned in the Charge Sheet. Further, as per Charge number 0 I the

Accused is the Lorry Driver and as per Charge Number 05 the accused is a Motor Cyclist.

Therefore the Learned Counsel for the Petitioner contented that the entire charge sheet is

defective.

In the case of H.P.D. Nimal Ranasinghe V. Ole, Police, He/tipola [SC Appeal 149/Z0171,

it was held that,

"The question that must be decided is whether any prejudice was caused to the

accused-appellant as a result of the said defect in the charge sheet or whether he was

misled by the said defect. It has to be noted here that the accused-appellant, at the

trial, had not taken up an objection to the charge sheet on the basis of the said

defect ... . "

Therefore, I am of the view that when a wrong name is cited in the charge sheet against an

Accused it has to be considered as a prejudice to the Accused. The submission ofthe State, at

the stage of the Argument was that the entire charge sheet cannot be defective merely

. "- '~. . , because tne )_. charge IS erroneous. However when consldenng Charge No.UI and Charge

Page 11 of 13

no.05 there is a confusion whether it was a lorry or ,a bicycle. Therefore both charges become

defective.

Also I wish to pay attention to the fact that the Petitioner on 01.10. 2019 soon after being

aware that the Attorney - at - Law who previously appeared on behalf of him has pleaded

guilty for all the charges in front of the Learned Magistrate of Kesbewa, the Petitioner

promptly took actions to submit an affidavit stating that such plea of guilty is without his

knowledge and instructions to the said Attorney - at - Law. Hence, I consider such affidavit

as a barrier to interpret unqualified admission that he is guilty of the offence which is

required under Section 183(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

Therefore, depending on such unqualified plea of guilt and convicting on such a plea amounts

to miscarriage of justice.

Accordingly, 1 am of the view that the learned High Court Judge has erred in refusing to

entertain the Revision Application of the Petitioner. Therefore, for the above mentioned

reasons I set aside orders of the Learned High Court Judge of Homagama dated 04.09.2019

of the case bearing the Number 37/2019/RA and the Order of the Learned Additional

Magistrate of Kesbewa dated 02.07.2019 of the case bearing the number 91561.

The Accused - Petitioner - Petitioner is discharged.

Registrar is directed to send copies of the orders to the relevant High Court and the

Magistrate's Court with the case record.

Revision Application is allowed.

Devika Abeyratne, J.

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Page 12 of 13

Cases referred to:

1. H.P.D. Nimai Ranasinghe V OIC, Police, Hellipoia, [SC Appeal 149/2017]

2. Godage and Others Vs. Officer-In-Charge, Police Station, Kahawalle - Sri Lanka

Law Reports- 1992 - Volume 1

3. Abdul Sameem V The Bribery Commissioner, 1991 1 SLR 76

4. Cooray Vs James Appu , 22 New Law Report 206

Page 13 of 13