Page 1 of 13

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Writ of Certiorari in terms of the provisions contained in Article Section 154(P) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka read together with the provisions contained in Section 7of the provincial High Court (Special Provisions) Act No.19 of 1990. Buddhipala Amrasinghe No.65/15, Rodney Street, Borella.

Petitioner

Vs. 1. Ajith Chitradeva Kuruppu 2. Hasanthi Kuruppu 3. Ramani Champa Kuruppu 4. Chandanie Ramya Kuruppu 5. Maya Waruni Kuruppu 6. Hiran Sathindra Kuruppu

All of 87, Rodney Street, Borella, Colombo 08. (More correctly No.67) 7. P. Leka Geethanjalie Perera

The Former Commissioner of National Housing Western Province, Department of Housing, No.204, Denzil Kobbekaduwa Mawatha, Battaramulla. Presently at No.89, Kaduwela Road, Battaramulla.

Respondents In the matter of an application for Revision against the Judgement entered in the Provincial High Court of the Western province Writ Application No. HCWA 03/2012. 1. Ajith Chitradeva Kuruppu 2. Hasanthi Kuruppu

Court of Appeal Revision Application No: PHC(APN) 54/2015 Provincial High Court Writ Application No. HCWA 03/2012

Page 2 of 13

3. Ramani Champa Kuruppu 4. Chandanie Ramya Kuruppu 5. Maya Waruni Kuruppu 6. Hiran Sathindra Kuruppu

All of 87, Rodney Street, Borella, Colombo 08. (More correctly No.67)

1st to 6th Respondent-Petitioners Vs. 1. Buddhipala Amrasinghe

No.65/15, Rodney Street, Borella

Petitioner-Respondent 7. P. Leka Geethanjalie Perera

The Former Commissioner of National Housing Western Province, Department of Housing, No.204, Denzil Kobbekaduwa Mawatha, Battaramulla. Presently at No.89, Kaduwela Road, Battaramulla. 7a. Mrs. P.H. Colombage,

The Commissioner of National Housing, Western Province, Department of Housing, No.89, Kaduwela Road, Battramulla. 7b. A.K. Nandanie H. Fernando, The Former Commissioner of

National Housing Western Province, Department of National Housing, Western Province

No.204, Denzil Kobbekauduwa, Mawatha, Battramulla.

7c. L.P. Manoja S.Pathirana Commissioner of Housing, Department of Housing Commissioner, Western Province.

Page 3 of 13

9th Floor, No.204, Denzil Kobbekauduwa Mawatha, Battramulla. 7th,7a, 7b and 7c Respondent-Respondents

Before: Prasantha De Silva, J.

K.K.A.V. Swarnadhipathi, J.

Counsel: Ranjan Suwandaratne PC with Haritha Adikari for the 1st- 6th Respondent-

Petitioners.

Senior State counsel Surange Wimalasena for the 7th Respondent-Respondents.

Rasika Dissanayake for the Petitioner-Respondent.

Written Submissions: 28.02.2020 for the Petitioner-Respondent tendered on 24.02.2020 for the 7a Respondent-Respondent 25.09.2018 for the 1st to 6th Respondent-Petitioners Argued on: 01.04.2022

Decided on: 23.02.2023

Prasantha De Silva, J

Judgment

The Petitioner namely, Buddhipala Amarasinghe is the tenant of premises bearing No.

65/15, Rodney Street, Borella, Colombo 8. The 1st to 6th Respondents above named in the

caption are the owners of the said premises bearing No. 65/15, Rodney Street, Borella,

Colombo 8. The said 1st to 6th Respondents had made an application on 05.01.2009 to

the 7th Respondent (the Commissioner of National Housing of the Western Province,

under the provisions of Section 18(A) of the Rent Act No. 07 of 1972 as amended seeking

to have the premises bearing Nos. 65/9, 65/10, 65/11, 65/12, 65/14, 65/15, 65/16

and 65/17 situated in Rodney Street, Borella, Colombo 8 demolished for the purpose of

developing the same. Consequent to the said application, the said 7th Respondent-

Respondent (hereinafter sometimes referred to as 7th Respondent) had decided to hold

an inquiry.

Page 4 of 13

After conclusion of the inquiry, the 7th Respondent had delivered the order on

10.02.2012 and held that Petitioner should hand over the vacant possession of premises

bearing No. 65/15 to the owners of the said premises and had ordered the said 1st to 6th

Respondent-Petitioners (hereinafter sometimes referred to as 1st to 6th Respondents) to

pay Rs. 150,000/- as compensation to the Petitioner.

Being aggrieved by the said order of the 7th Respondent, the Petitioner had invoked the

writ jurisdiction of the Provincial High Court of the Western Province holden in Colombo

against the 1st 7th Respondents in case bearing No. HCRA 03/2012, seeking a Writ of

Certiorari to have the said order of the 7th Respondent dated 10.02.2012 quashed.

After objections and counter objections were filed by parties, the said application had

been taken up for inquiry. Having considered the material placed before Court and

having heard the Counsel who appeared for the respective parties, the learned High Court

Judge has delivered the order on 10.03.2015 in favour of the Petitioner by quashing the

Order of the 7th Respondent-Respondent (herein after sometimes refereed to on the 7th

Respondent).

Being aggrieved by the said order, 1st to 6th Respondent-Petitioners have invoked the

revisionary jurisdiction of this Court seeking to have the said Order of the learned High

Court Judge set aside.

It should be noted that the original application made by 1st to 6th Respondents to the 7th

Respondent (National Housing Commissioner of Western Province) sought to have

premises bearing Nos. 65/9, 65/10, 65/11, 65/12, 65/14, 65/15, 65/16 and 65/17

situated in Rodney Street, Borella, Colombo 8 demolished in terms of Section 18A of the

Rent Act No. 07 of 1972.

According to the order of the 7th Respondent, it was decided that Petitioner should hand

over the vacant possession of premises bearing No. 65/15 to the owner, subject to the

condition that a sum of Rs. 150,000/- is paid as compensation to the Petitioner.

The compensation of Rs. 150,000/- was computed by the 7th Respondent as follows;

In terms of 8, ten years' annual value of the subject matter would be a sum of

Rs. 36,000/- (Rs. 3600 x 10)

The market value of the subject matter would be a sum of Rs. 500,000/- and

accordingly, 20% of the said value would be a sum of Rs. 100,000/-.

Page 5 of 13

In terms of the provisions of the Rent Act, the highest amount that could be

compensated is a sum of Rs. 150,000/-.

From the above mentioned three options, the highest amount of Rs. 150,000/- was

ordered to be paid to the Petitioner-Respondent as compensation. It was submitted on

behalf of the 1st to 6th Respondent-Petitioners that 7th Respondent has placed reliance on

the contents of the valuation report titled CM/CMC/LM/701 prepared by the provincial

assessor of Assessor's Department.

It was the position taken up by the Petitioner-Respondent that Petitioner-Respondent did

not get the opportunity to consider the valuation report submitted by the Government

Valuer [9] in which the old building was valued at Rs. 500,000/. Furthermore, the

Petitioner-Respondent has relied on the Valuation Report prepared by Licensed Valuer,

M.T. Hilmy Farook dated 09.03.2012, in which the premises in question with the land

was valued at Rs. 3,420,000/-.

As such, it was alleged by the Petitioner-Respondent that he was not given the opportunity

to question the Valuation Report [9] of the Government Valuer, as it was not produced

in evidence at the stage of inquiry by the Landlord-Respondent-Petitioner. Furthermore,

7th Respondent-Respondent had not made even the simplest effort to explain the basis on

which she relied upon the said valuation report [9] to arrive at her decision without

making parties aware thereof.

Therefore, it was contended by the Petitioner-Respondent that failure to make the

impugned Valuation Report [9] available at the inquiry had caused great prejudice to

the Petitioner-Respondent and that Petitioner-Respondent was not given a fair hearing as

a result of it. Accordingly, the Petitioner-Respondent has urged the Court to hold that 7th

Respondent has blatantly violated the principles of natural justice by not giving the

opportunity to rebut the contents in the Valuation Report marked 9 at the inquiry.

On this basis, the learned High Court Judge has held that Petitioner-Respondent was not

given an opportunity to respond to the evidence considered by the 7th Respondent with

regard to the valuation of the Government Valuer and that it amounts to a violation of

the rules of natural justice.

However, it can be observed that 7th Respondent has given the Petitioner-Respondent a

fair hearing as the Tenant Petitioner-Respondent was given an opportunity to present his

case in an open process. The decision also does not reflect any reasonable suspicion of

Page 6 of 13

bias and is appropriate to the statutory and social context. Therefore, Learned High Court

Judge has erroneously come to the conclusion that there was a breach of principles of

natural justice.

Under section 114(d) of the Evidence Ordinance the Court may presume that judicial

and official acts have been regularly performed. Section 114(d) implies that if it is proven

that a judicial or official act has been performed, then in the absence of any other

evidence, it shall be presumed that it had been done regularly.

In the case of Hemathilake Vs. Allina and Others [2003] 2 SLR 144 it was emphasized

that;

What section 114 of the Evidence Ordinance provides for is the common-sense

advice that Court may from a proved fact infer another fact which it thinks is likely

to be true regard being had to human conduct and the common course of natural

events. The particular facts of each case must be carefully considered before any

inference is drawn under section 114 of the Evidence Ordinance..

Therefore, there is a presumption in favour of the 7th Respondent-Respondent

(Commissioner of National housing) that the inquiry was conducted in a fair manner and

that the valuation done by the chief valuer was conducted in a regular manner. It is for

the Petitioner-Respondent to rebut this presumption.

Although the impugned valuation report was not produced in evidence at the inquiry

before the Commissioner, the Tenant-Petitioner-Respondent had the opportunity of

taking up the matter pertaining to valuation report at the inquiry. If the Petitioner-

Respondent wanted to challenge it, he ought to have challenged it at the inquiry by raising

questions regarding the said valuation report, in cross examination of the Landlord 1st

Respondent-Petitioner. Petitioner-Respondent had ample opportunity to cross-examine

the 1st Respondent-Petitioner with regard to the valuation during the inquiry but has

failed to do so. Thus, it seems that the Petitioner-Respondent had slept over his rights and

thereby waived off the right to question about the impugned valuation report.

Although the Petitioner-Respondent had taken a valuation for the building sought to be

demolished by a private valuer, it had not been produced by the Petitioner-Respondent at

the inquiry to challenge the contents of the report of government valuer. Therefore, the

Petitioner-Respondent is precluded from coming before this court and stating that 7th

Respondent, who conducted the inquiry has violated the rules of natural justice by not

Page 7 of 13

providing a fair trial. In this respect, court takes cognizance of Section 114(d) of the

Evidence ordinance.

Furthermore, at the inquiry before the Commissioner, evidence had been led on behalf of

the Landlord-1st Respondent-Petitioner. Although the impugned valuation report was not

produced in evidence by the Landlord-Respondent-Petitioner, it appears that the Tenant

Petitioner-Respondent had the opportunity of taking up the matter pertaining to the

valuation report in cross examination since the Landlord-1st Respondent-Petitioner was

cross examined on behalf the Petitioner-Respondent and the Petitioner-Respondent had

the opportunity to question the Landlord-1st Respondent-Petitioner regard to the

government valuation. If he wanted to challenge it, he ought to have challenged it at the

inquiry stage. It should also be noted that although Petitioner-Respondent, had taken a

valuation for the building sought to be demolished by a private valuer, it has failed to

produce the private valuers report at the inquiry. Thus, the Petitioner-Respondent is

precluded from saying that 7th Respondent-Commissioner of the National Housing, by

whom the inquiry was conducted, violated the rules of natural justice in not providing a

fair trial.

Furthermore, Petitioner-Respondent had adduced evidence at the inquiry and stated that

his predecessors were in occupation of the impugned premises as tenants since 1931 and

that Petitioner-Respondent carried out repairs to the said premises and virtually

reconstructed it to a substantial house. However, the 7th Respondent-Respondent

Commissioner had decided that improvements mentioned by the Petitioner-Respondent

are mere repairs, that the impugned premises cannot be considered as a new building

and that improvements and repairs done by the Petitioner-Respondent were done without

authority. The 7th Respondent has also considered whether the Respondent-Petitioner had

capacity to make renovations to the property concerned and has concluded based on the

documents related to assets and banking documents provided that the Respondent-

Petitioner has the capacity to proceed with the renovations.

Based on these observations, the 7th Respondent had determined compensation to be paid

to the Petitioner-Respondent as Rs. 150,000/-, restricted to the valuation made by the

chief valuer and excluding the costs of improvements supposedly done by the Petitioner-

Respondent. Order also states that Petitioner-Respondent should handover possession of

the said property within 90 days to the 1st Respondent-Petitioner for the purpose of

carrying on with the development work.

Page 8 of 13

The said order has been made in terms of Section 18A(1) of the Rent Act No. 55 of 1980

and Act No. 26 of 2002 as amended. In terms of Section 18A(2)(b)(ii), the Commissioner

of National Housing has to order the owner of the building to pay compensation to the

tenant, such compensation as the Commissioner determines to be reasonable for the loss

of possession by such tenant. The amount ordered to be so paid shall in no case be less

than ten years annual value of the premises calculated as at the date of the application

for demolition or, 20% of the market value of the premises as determined by the Chief

Valuer as at the date of the application for demolition or Rs. 150,000/-, whichever

higher.

Since the annual value of the premises is Rs. 3600, for a period of ten years, it amounts

to Rs. 36,000/-. The market value was determined by the Chief Valuer as Rs. 500,000/-

and twenty per centum of the market value is Rs. 100,000/-. Thus, the higher value is Rs.

150,000/-.

The main grievance of the Petitioner-Respondent is the Chief Valuer valuing the premises

for Rs. 500,000/-, which the private valuer had valued for Rs.3,420,000/. It was the

contention of the Petitioner-Respondent that it is illogical to assume the market value of

a property situated in Borella as Rs. 500,000/- as at 05.01.2009 and it was further

contended that the valuation report 9 does not bear any description or any explanation

to justify the calculation of Rs. 500,000/-.

In order to assess whether the valuation by the Chief valuer is proper, we must first

interpret the term market value of the premises under Section 18A (2) of the Rent Act

No. 07 of 1972 as amended. When construing the intention of the Legislature, one must

consider the nature of the statute.

Section 18A (2) of the Rent Act refers to the market value as;

Twenty per centum of the market value of the premises as determined by the

Chief Valuer as at the date of the application for demolition.

It was argued by Petitioner-Respondent that premises means, any building or part of a

building together with the land appertaining thereto based on the interpretation given

in section 48 of the Act and that Chief Valuer had not properly valued the premises

including the building and the land.

Page 9 of 13

When interpreting the word premises indicated in Section 18A (2), it is plausible to

apply the purposive rule of interpretation, which provides for an interpretation which

gives effect to the purpose of the statute, where the alternative interpretation frustrates

the purpose of the statutory provision.

As held in the case of Priyavarte Mehta Vs. Amrendu Banerjee [1997] AIHC 4292;

.When the plain meaning results in absurdity, inconsistency or

ambiguity or defeats the purpose or object of the provisions, then the rule of

interpretation can be applied to find out the intendment or the object of the

relevant provision..

Hence, if the word premises means, any building or part of a building together with

the land appertaining thereto, it results in absurdity, inconsistency, ambiguity and

defeats the purpose or object of the provision as the premises in question with the land

was valued at Rs. 3,420,000/- by the Private Valuer, which is more than six times the

valuation of the Government Valuer.

It should be noted that the description given to premises in the 10th edition of Blacks

Law Dictionary, is building, property, establishment, office, grounds, estate, site, place.

Thus, it is seen that Blacks Law Dictionary defines the term premises as a building.

The marginal note of Section 18A of the Rent Act deals with an order for Demolition of

buildings over fifty years old. The importance of a marginal note for interpretation of

Sections was emphasized in Bindras Interpretation of Statutes 12th edition 2017, pg. 280;

Courts have settled that marginal notes are to be construed as if they were a part

of the Section. Marginal notes form a guide to the mind and intendment of the

LegislatureIt can afford little guidance to the construction of an enactment,

especially when the language is plain and unambiguous.

Section 18A (2) states;

Where the Commissioner for National Housing makes an order under subsection

(1) authorizing the owner of a building to demolish such building, the

Commissioner shall-...

Marginal note of Section 18A refers to demolition of a building. Therefore, in view of the

wordings of Section 18A (2), it is clear that legislature intended to value only the building

sought to be demolished. Thus, the word premises used in Section 18A (2) does not

consist of the land.

Page 10 of 13

In the case of The Film Exhibitors, Guild And ... Vs. State Of Andhra Pradesh And Others,

[AIR 1987 AP 110] it was held;

But in construing the machinery provisions to make the machinery workable ut

res valeat potius quam pereat, i.e., the Court would avoid that construction which

would fail to relieve the manifest purpose of the legislation of the presumption that

the legislature would enact only for the purpose of bringing about an effective

result. It is not the function of the Court to hunt out ambiguities by strained and

unnatural meaning; close reasoning is to be adopted; harmonious construction is to

be adhered to; all the relevant provisions are to be read together to gather the

intention from the language employed, its context, and give effect to the intention

of the legislature.

It was pointed out on behalf of the Respondent-Petitioners that premises can be situated

within a land which can vary from 8 perch to even 30 perch and if the property is valued,

to pay 20% of the value of the building as well as the land, the owner of the property has

to pay as compensation an amount that will exceed the value of the building that is to be

constructed. This will frustrate the very purpose of the aforementioned provisions

brought in by the Legislature, the intention of promoting the landowners to construct

new buildings in place of old buildings which are over 40 years.

Moreover, if an old house over 40 years, situated in a 8 to 10 perch land in highly

residential urban areas such as Colombo 3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10 is to be demolished and the

Government Valuer is directed to ascertain the market value of the land, house and the

rental value, the valuation of even the said small portion of land will be extremely high

and obviously be above the cost of constructing a new building. If the Commissioner

directs the Tenant to pay 20% of the said market value which consists of land as well as

the building, no Landlord in an urban area will be able to utilize Section 18A to construct

new houses in places where extremely old houses in dilapidated condition belonging to

them are situated.

Therefore, it is plausible to compute the value of the premises by considering the square

area of the building, facilities of the building, the present rental and market value of the

building, without considering the value of land where the house is situated.

In the instant case, premises concerned is not the land, but the old building, which is over

40 years. Thus, Section 18A (2) of the Act speaks of a valuation that should necessarily

be in relation to the building sought to be demolished, which is the subject matter of the

said application of the Landlord-1st Respondent-Petitioner.

Page 11 of 13

Landlords-Respondent-Petitioners have submitted that the valuation should exclude the

value of the land as it will be an extremely high amount when considering the area where

the building is situated. On the contrary, Petitioner-Respondent has submitted the

valuation given by the private valuer as the value of the land.

However, private valuer has valued the premises including the building as well as the

land. In such an instance, if market value of the land is considered, the whole purpose of

Section 18A and the specific intention of the Legislature in introducing the said provisions

with regard to demolition of an old building for the purpose of development will be

frustrated and no owner would be able to develop a land with a tenant in terms of Section

18A (2) of the Rent Act No. 07 of 1972 (as amended)

Therefore, it clearly manifests that the word valuation contemplated in Section 18A (2)

(ii) does not intend to value the land where the building in question is situated and the

actual value necessary to be calculated for the purpose of Section 18A of the Rent Act No.

07 of 1972 (as amended) is only the valuation of the old building.

Hence, I am of the view that the statutory interpretation of premises referred to in

Section 18A(2)(i) and (ii) is confined only to the building. As such, the Chief Valuer

valuing the old building for Rs. 500,000/- is reasonable. It is obvious that the private

valuer Mr. Hilmy has valued the old building with the land for Rs. 3,420,000/- and it

does not come within the purview of Section 18A (2) (ii) of the Rent Act.

In this respect, it is noteworthy, that the principal enactment of Rent Act No. 07 of 1972

was enacted on the 1st of March 1972. The word premises in Section 48 of the principal

enactment too was defined in year 1972. However, Section 18A with regard to demolition

of buildings over 40 years old was introduced in year 1980 by Act No.55 of 1980.

As there was no provision regarding demolition of a building in the principal enactment,

term premises has been defined as a building or part of a building together with the land

appertaining thereto in the principal Act. This definition is not in line with the meaning

of term premises referred to in Section 18A (2)(ii), as Section 18A(2)(ii) was introduced

in year 1980, for the purpose of allowing the demolition of old buildings to facilitate new

constructions.

This indicates that the intention of the legislature in view of Section 18A (2)(ii) of the

Amended Act was to define premises as a building. This interpretation is supported by

the definition provided in Blacks Law Dictionary to premises as explained above.

Page 12 of 13

Therefore, this court concludes that Chief Valuer has made a proper valuation by

considering the only the value of the impugned building sought to be demolished.

Although the Respondent-Petitioners had made the application in terms of Section 18A

(2) of the Rent Act and obtained an order for demolition in year 2012, the matter is still

pending in Court more than a decade later. Hence, it is apparent that rights of the

Landlords-Respondent-Petitioners had been prejudiced by the objections raised by the

Petitioner-Respondent. Petitioner-Respondent has been in possession of the premises for

the last 10 years after the order was issued by the Commission of National Housing paying

a meagre sum as rent.

It should also be noted that Respondents have attempted to reach a settlement with the

Petitioner-Respondent by providing alternate accommodation in Kaduwela, Athurugiriya

and Homagama, as provided for under section 18A(2)(b)(i) of the Rent Act (as amended).

Respondent-Petitioner had also agreed to provide a sum of money as settlement or to pay

rent, if the tenant arranges an alternate accommodation for himself. However, Petitioner-

Respondent was not willing to accept both such proposals.

Moreover, as the construction was put to a halt by Petitioner-Respondent continuing to

be in possession of the above premises, Respondent-Petitioners are most likely to sustain

a relatively higher amount of cost due to the massive increase in building materials at

present. This has caused the Landlords-Respondent-Petitioners a grave injustice.

It should also be noted that, Section 18A (2) of the Rent Act (as amended) does not provide

any party to challenge the valuation of the Chief Valuer or to conduct an inquiry to decide

whether to accept or reject the market value of the premises determined by the

Government Valuer. The 7th Respondent Commissioner has to decide what is the highest

amount out of three categories that has been clearly spelt out in terms of Section 18A(2)

(ii) of the said Act.

As such, it is clear that in terms of Section 18A(2)(b)(i) and (ii) of the Rent Act, the

Commissioner of National Housing shall order the owner of the building to pay as

compensation, an amount which should not be less than ten years annual value of the

premises calculated as at the date of the application made for demolition or an amount

which is twenty per centum of the market value of the premises as determined by the

Chief Valuer as at the date of the application for demolition, or Rs. 150,000/-, whichever

higher. Hence, the minimum compensation that can be paid to a tenant in terms of Section

18A (2) (ii) is Rs. 150,000/-.

Page 13 of 13

In view of the relevant provisions of the Rent Act as amended, the 7th Respondent-

Commissioner has acted within the scope of duties entrusted to her and conducted the

inquiry according to the principles of natural justice.

On this basis, it is apparent that the learned High Court Judge has failed to properly

consider the legal provisions, the evidence led at the inquiry and the scope of writ

jurisdiction. An administrative decision can be quashed on the ground of illegality,

irrationality, and procedural impropriety. However, the learned High Court Judge had

not addressed her mind to the said grounds but come to an erroneous conclusion that the

7th Respondent Commissioner had blatantly violated the rules of natural justice of the

Petitioner-Respondent and held against the Respondent-Petitioners. In view of the

aforesaid reasons, the Order of the learned High Court Judge dated 10.03.2015 cannot

be allowed to stand as it has an effect of frustrating all applications under Section 18A of

the Rent Act No. 7 of 1972 as amended.

Therefore, I hold that the learned High Court Judge has erred in law and facts and come

to an erroneous conclusion by deciding the application in favour of the Petitioner-

Respondent. We set aside the Order of the learned High Court Judge dated 10.03.2015

and uphold the order of the 7th Respondent-Commissioner of National Housing (Western

province) and allow for the continuation of the application made by the Respondent-

Petitioner to the 7th Respondent under Section 18A (2) of the Rent Act. The Respondent-

Petitioner is entitled comply with the order dated 10.02.2012 of the 7th Respondent-

Commissioner of National Housing.

We allow the application for revision made by the 1st- 6th Respondent-Petitioners.

Application allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K.K.A.V. Swarnadhipathi, J. I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL