1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

1. Kandegedara Sudath De Silva

Court of Appeal No: 2. Nanayakkara Vithange Pathmasiri

CA/HCC/0302-A, B/2015

High Court of Galle ACCUSED-APPELLANTS

Case No: HC/2814/2006

vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

P. Kumararatnam, J.

COUNSEL : U.R.D.Silva, PC with Savithri Fernando

for the 2nd Accused-Appellant.

Shaminda Wickrama, SC for the

Respondent.

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 11/10/2022

DECIDED ON : 18/11/2022

******************************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellants (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellants) with another were indicted in the High Court of Galle on following

charges:

1. On or before 24th January 1998, the accused attempted to commit

robbery on the property belonging to Sinharaja Tea Factory being

armed with a deadly weapon, an offence punishable under Section 384

read with Section 32 of the Penal Code.

2. In the same transaction the second accused did possess an offensive

weapon namely a hand grenade which is an offence punishable under

Section 2(1) (b) of the Offensive Weapons Act, No. 18 of 1996.

As the 2nd Appellant absconded the court in this case, after an inquiry this

case was fixed in absentia of him under Section 241 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979. After the conclusion of the prosecutions case,

the learned High Court Judge had called for the defence and the 1st Appellant

had made a dock statement denying the charge. After considering the

3 | P a g e

evidence presented by both parties, the learned High Court Judge had

convicted the Appellants as charged and sentenced them as follows:

For the 1st count each Appellants were imposed 10 years rigorous

imprisonment. Further, the 1st Appellant was imposed with a fine of

Rs.7500/- with a default sentence of 01-year rigorous imprisonment. The 2nd

Appellant was imposed a fine of Rs.10000/- with a default sentence of 01-

year rigorous imprisonment.

For the second count the 2nd Appellant was imposed 05 years rigorous

imprisonment with a fine of Rs.7500/-. In default 01-year rigorous

imprisonment was imposed. According to the Learned High Court Judge, the

sentences imposed on the 2nd Appellant will run concurrently to each other.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellants

preferred this appeal to this court. The 1st Appellant had withdrawn his

appeal on 23/05/2022 and his appeal was accordingly dismissed.

The Learned Counsel for the 2nd Appellant informed this court that the

Appellant has given consent to argue this matter in his absence due to the

Covid 19 pandemic. Also, at the time of argument the Appellant was

connected via Zoom platform from prison.

The 2nd Appellant hereinafter will be referred to as the Appellant in this case.

Background of the Case.

According to PW4, he was the Deputy Superintendent of Sinharaja Tea

Factory at the relevant time. On the day of the incident, as he was not feeling

well, he went to upper story rest room to take a rest. At that time no

electricity was available in the factory. In the early hours of the incident, a

person had approached him with a torch, jolted him awake, and directed him

to come to the ground floor. The person who woke him up was wearing a T-

shirt and a denim trouser and was in possession of a knife at that time.PW4

4 | P a g e

had also seen six other persons among his employees who were seated there

at the ground floor. Among the people in the ground floor, he had seen two

unknown persons with covered faces. The intruders remained in the tea

factory until about 6.00 a.m. This witness somehow managed to escape from

the strangers and got refuge from a nearby house. In the meantime, a person

had been dispatched to the Neluwa Police Station to lodge a complaint. An

identification parade was held and he had identified two persons at the

parade. As the 2nd Appellant had absconded the court, only 1st Appellant was

present in the court but he could not identify him as he gave evidence after

about 15-16 years of the incident.

PW2 had rushed to the tea factory after seeing several individuals running

towards the tea factory in the early hours and saw three new faces among

those claiming to be CID officers looking for PW4. He had seen weapons in

their possession. PW4 had fled the scene at that time. After some time, he

found that three people had been arrested by the police. He did not attend

in the identification.

PW10, had rushed to the scene at about 7.00 a.m. as per the direction of

Officer-in-charge of Neluwa Police Station. As the people who were assembled

at the scene informed that a group of men numbering three had entered the

Singharaja Forest, the police team also entered the forest immediately. They

had seen the unknown persons on an elevated place about half a mile from

the entrance of the forest. At that time the police had seen one person making

a call and others standing close to him. After seeing them one of the men

had opened fire at them. In retaliation, the police had opened fire twice on

air and requested them to surrender. The men were arrested and weapons

were recovered from them. A hand bomb was recovered from the Appellant.

According to PW18, the Government Analyst, the bomb recovered from the

Appellant was confirmed to be one coming under the offensive weapons Act.

Witness PW14 who held the identification parade had stated that PW4 had

identified 1st and 2nd Appellants in the parade.

5 | P a g e

After the closure of the prosecutions case, the defense was called and as the

Appellant had absconded the court, his counsel had made submission on

behalf of him.

At the hearing of this appeal the Counsel for the Appellant had raised

following grounds of appeal.

1. The identity of the Appellant had not been established beyond

reasonable doubt.

2. Possession of hand bomb by the Appellant have not been proved by

the prosecution.

Identity of an accused is very important in a criminal trial. Wrong identity

may cost irreparable damage to the accused. Hence the prosecution has to

prove correct identity of an accused to secure a criminal conviction. If the

identification evidence is challenged successfully, where there is no or

limited other evidence, the outcome will be an acquittal of the accused.

In Turnbull [1977] QB 224 the Court of Appeal laid down the following

guidelines for judges in trials that involve disputed identification evidence.

Where the case against an accused depends wholly or substantially on

the correctness of one or more identifications of the accused, which the

defence alleges to be mistaken, the judge should warn the jury of the

special need for caution before convicting the accused in reliance on the

correctness of the identification(s).

The judge should tell the jury that:

(i) caution is required to avoid the risk of injustice;

(ii) a witness who is honest may be wrong even if they are convinced,

they are right;

(iii) a witness who is convincing may still be wrong;

6 | P a g e

(iv) more than one witness may be wrong;

(v) a witness who recognises the defendant, even when the witness

knows the defendant very well, may be wrong.

The Judge should direct the jury to examine closely the circumstances in

which the identification by each witness came to be made.

Some of these circumstances may include:

(i) the length of time the accused was observed by the witness;

(ii) the distance of the witness was from the accused;

(iii) the state of the light;

(iv) the length of time elapsed between the original observation and

the subsequent identification to the police.

Guided by the above-mentioned judgment, I now assess whether the

prosecution in this instance has proven the Appellants identification beyond

reasonable doubt, as mistaken identity occurs frequently in good faith, but

the consequences can be extremely serious for the Appellant. Therefore, the

cases of this nature must be dealt with utmost sensitivity.

PW14, the Additional District Judge of Magistrate Court Udugama had held

the identification parade pertaining to this case. He also gave evidence before

the High Court of Galle. The said identification parade note was marked as

X by the prosecution. The Appellant was identified by PW1 who had passed

away before he could give evidence before the High Court.

According to PW10, upon the direction of the Officer-in-charge of the Neluwa

Police Station, along with a police team, had gone to the place of incident at

about 7.00 a.m. He was informed that three persons with arms had gone in

to the Sinharaja Forest. Acting on this information he had gone in to the

forest and arrested three persons with arms. Before he could arrest them,

one of three had opened fire at them. After the arrest, a hand bomb had been

7 | P a g e

among other items which were recovered from the Appellant. The 1st

Appellant was identified by PW4 at the identification parade. The Appellant

was arrested along with the 1st Appellant with arms within a very shorter

period of the attempted robbery incident. This evidence clearly proves that

the Appellant was also a member of the robbery group.

The lay witnesses who gave evidence told that three persons had entered the

Singharaja Forest upon failing their mission to rob the tea factory. With this

evidence followed by the apprehension of the Appellant by the police with a

hand bomb among the other items recovered from him clearly establishes

the participation of the Appellant in their failed robbery attempt. The

circumstantial evidence led by the prosecution adequately infers the facts in

issue and could reasonably conclude that the critical fact occurred.

Considering the evidence presented in this case by the prosecution, a prima

facie case had been established against the Appellant. Hence, I conclude that

the first ground advanced by the Appellant has no merit.

In the second ground the Appellant contends that the possession of hand

bomb by the Appellant had not been proved by the prosecution.

The prosecution through PW10, clearly established that the Appellant had

possessed a hand bomb among the other items recovered from him upon his

arrest. Further, the recovered hand bomb with another bomb recovered

closed to the crime scene subsequently were sent to the Government Analyst

for confirmation. The report which had been marked as P5 confirmed that

the grenades were offensive weapons. Hence, it is not true that the

prosecution had not proven the possession of a hand bomb by the Appellant.

During the trial, the remains of the hand bombs were not available, as all

the productions pertaining to this case had been destroyed due to a flood

that had destroyed the production room of the Magistrate Court. Hence, this

ground also has no merit.

8 | P a g e

Having considered the circumstantial evidence led by the prosecution I am

inclined to accept that the prosecution had adequately established the

charges level against the Appellant. I am of the view that the Learned High

court judge has rightly convicted the Appellant as charged.

Therefore, I affirm the conviction and dismiss the Appeal of the Appellant.

Considering the circumstances of this case I order the sentence will deem to

have taken effect from the date of incarceration of the Appellant, namely on

10/11/2021.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send a copy of this judgement to

the High Court of Galle along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Sampath B.Abayakoon, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL