BAL-0020-2022 Page 1 of 8 05/10/2022 IJ-40-22

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for bail under and in terms of Section 15B of the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act No 48 of 1979 as amended by Act, No. 12 of 2022. Husni M. RizniAttorney at Law, 56A, Sri Vishnu Kovil Road, Dehiwala.

Petitioner

On behalf of Buwaneswaran Rajeevan Kachchai South, Kodikamam. Presently of, Remand Prison, Jaffna. Court of Appeal Application No: CA/BAL/20/2022 Magistrates Court of Chavakachcheri Case No: B/503/2020

Vs.

Suspect 1. E.M.S. Edirisinghe

Chief Inspector of Police, Officer in Charge, Police Station, Kodikamam. 2. Ujith M.P. Liyanage

Senior Superintendent of Police, SSPs Office, Jaffna. 3. Manoj Ranagala

Former Senior Superintendent of Police, Jaffna.

BAL-0020-2022 Page 2 of 8 05/10/2022 IJ-40-22

4. C.D. Wickramaratne,

Inspector General of Police, Police Headquarters, Colombo 01. 5. The Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12.

Respondents

Before :Menaka Wijesundera J.Neil Iddawala J. Counsel :N.M. Shaheid and Rushdhie Habeeb for the Petitioner. Ridma Kuruwita, SC for the Respondents. Argued on

: 29.09.2022

Decided on :05.10.2022

Iddawala J

This is an application for bail filed under Section 15B of the Prevention of

Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act, No. 48 of 1979 (hereinafter PTA), as

amended by the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions)

(Amendment) Act, No. 12 of 2022 (hereinafter Amendment Act, No. 12 of

2022) by the petitioner, on behalf of the suspect who is detained at the

Remand Prison, Jaffna.

BAL-0020-2022 Page 3 of 8 05/10/2022 IJ-40-22

The facts of the case briefly are as follows. The suspect, Buwaneswaran

Rajeevan who was an employee of the Sri Lanka Transport Board (SLTB) -

Vavuniya was confronted at his residence by a team of Police officers

headed by the 1st respondent on 18.10.2020. The 1st respondent proceeded

to arrest him on the grounds that he was involved with the terrorist group

Saava or 007, and functioned as its leader.

The suspect was thereafter produced before the Magistrates Court of

Chavakachcheri under case No. B/503/2020 on 19.10.2020, and the 3rd

respondent reported that the suspect was arrested on information received

from the Criminal Investigation Department (CID) that he was the leader

of the above-mentioned terrorist group. It was further stated that a sword

used by the suspect for the purpose of stabbing a person, and a hand

grenade were recovered from the goat-shed located behind the suspects

house. The suspect was also claimed to have had a photograph of the

deceased leader of a proscribed terrorist organization on his mobile phone

which he had uploaded on his Facebook profile (vide annexures X and

P2).

Thus, upon the 3rd respondents request, the suspect was remanded in

terms of Section 7(1) of the PTA until further advice is obtained from the

Attorney-General. Furthermore, the alleged hand grenade and the mobile

phone recovered from the suspect had been forwarded to the Government

Analysts Department, and their report has been received on 18.03.2021.

However, despite nearly two years elapsing since the arrest of the suspect,

and more than 18 months having passed since the Government Analysts

report has been received, no indictment has been filed and no trial has

commenced against the suspect. In this connection, a clear Guideline to

the investigation officers was set out by the Supreme Court in Sukumar

Vs Officer in Charge Joseph Army Camp, Vavuniya (2003) 1 S.L.R. 399,

where it opined,

BAL-0020-2022 Page 4 of 8 05/10/2022 IJ-40-22

until leave was granted in this application, no steps were

taken to have the petitioner brought to trial, nor have steps been

taken to ascertain whether the Attorney-General consents to the

release of the petitioner from custody in terms of the proviso to

section 7(i) of the Prevention of Terrorism Act.

In court's view, it is a necessary implication of that proviso that

the authority responsible for the arrest or detention must inform

the Attorney-General as soon as possible of the fact of such

arrest and detention in order to enable the Attorney-General to

review the matter and to determine whether he should be further

detained in custody.

The petitioner, on behalf of the suspect, states that he denies the said

allegations that the suspect was involved in any terrorist group and also

denies any weapons being recovered from his house, and further states

that no such goat shed exists behind his house. He further posits that

the suspect was beaten and coerced into admitting this version of events

by the respondents. The petitioner states that the suspect has been further

aggrieved due to this long incarceration, with his young wife and daughter

aged 3 years becoming destitute, and his employer (SLTB) informing him

that he is considered to have vacated his post with effect from 19.10.2020.

Having thus set out the relevant facts of the case, this Court will now turn

to the law. The applicable law is contained in Section 15B of the PTA, as

amended by the Amendment Act, No. 12 of 2022. Section 15B stipulates

the following:

Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the provisions of

this Act, if the trial against a person remanded or detained under

this Act has not commenced after the expiration of twelve

months, from the date of arrest, the Court of Appeal may release

BAL-0020-2022 Page 5 of 8 05/10/2022 IJ-40-22

such person on bail, upon an application in that behalf, made by

the suspect or an Attorney- at-Law on his behalf:

Provided however, notwithstanding the provisions of subsection

(2) of section 15, the High Court may in exceptional

circumstances release the suspect on bail subject to such

conditions as the High Court may deem fit:

Provided further, where the trial against an accused in respect of

whom the indictment has been forwarded and filed in the High

Court, has not commenced after the expiration of twelve months

from the date of such filing, the High Court may consider to

release such person on bail, upon an application in that behalf

made by the accused or an Attorney- at-Law on his behalf.

The above Section explicitly recognizes three stages at which a person

arrested under the PTA is rendered an opportunity to make a request to

be admitted to bail to the appropriate court. If an applicant satisfies the

legislative prescription thus envisioned, he may be considered for release

on bail under the PTA. As such, with the advent of the Amendment Act,

No. 12 of 2022, bail under the PTA has undergone a significant

transformation. At this point, it is pertinent to highlight, for the benefit of

all, the legislative intent behind Amendment Act, No. 12 of 2022. As per

the Hansard, Volume 289 No. 5, Column 788 dated 22.03.2022, the

then Minister of Foreign Affairs whilst introducing amendments to the PTA

has stated as follows,

[t]he provisions of the Prevention of Terrorism Act must be resorted

to only in very exceptional circumstances. It cannot be the norm; it

is not the rule; it is very much the exception. For example, just

because a gun is found in somebodys house, you cannot

automatically invoke the provisions of the Prevention of Terrorism

BAL-0020-2022 Page 6 of 8 05/10/2022 IJ-40-22

Act. The gun may have been there in connection with some personal

dispute or some commercial dispute in future, the normal

provisions of the law, that is, investigations under the Criminal

Procedure Code, should be accepted as a norm and it is only in very

exceptional cases where there is manifest evidence indicative of

some terrorism dimension that recourse to the Prevention of

Terrorism Act will be justifiable. (Emphasis added)

As detailed above, the suspect has been incarcerated for nearly two

years and is yet to be served with an indictment, with no indication of

the commencement of a trial. Hence, the petitioner has fulfilled the

legislative prescription envisioned by Section 15B of the PTA,

introduced by Amendment Act, No. 12 of 2022. As such, this Court is

vested with the discretion to consider the suspects bail application. At

this juncture, it is pertinent to note that the State Counsel has not

objected to the granting of bail to the suspect. In considering all the

facts detailed above, it appears to this Court that the respondents have

held the suspect in incarceration for a prolonged time under the PTA,

without building up a rational basis and any prospect of a trial. The

Court also notes the inordinate delay in the process of administering

justice, and the aggrieved state of the suspect owing to such

shortcomings.

Whilst the law does not construe the incarceration of a suspect

pending investigation as amounting to punishment, it does indeed

restrict the inherent rights and freedoms of the suspect, which are

ensured by the Constitution. Hence, a suspect has the right to be

brought to trial without unreasonable and inordinate delay, even in

the context of a special circumstance envisioned under the PTA. If

adequate material to justify the continued incarceration of a suspect

is absent, such person must be discharged at the first available

opportunity. As per Section 15B of the PTA, the legislature has

BAL-0020-2022 Page 7 of 8 05/10/2022 IJ-40-22

recognized a period of 12 months for the relevant authorities to carry

out investigations and build a case for the prosecution of the suspect.

And at the end of the 12-month period, if a case with a reasonable

prospect of securing a conviction cannot be formulated, i.e., an

indictment has not been forwarded, the law prescribes that such

suspect may be considered to release on bail. It is the duty of the

investigators to seek advice/instructions from the Attorney Generals

Department within the given a 12-month period, and expedite the

investigation according to law.

It must also be noted that the delays in the process of administration

of justice have been exacerbated by the relevant parties restricting

themselves to archaic procedures and failing to update their processes

with the technology available today. In the instant case for example,

each day spent on physically sending records/reports from Jaffna to

Colombo and vice versa, add yet another day of restricting the freedom

of the suspect. Such delays could have been averted if modern

technology was utilized to send and receive documents, in accordance

with laws and regulations providing for electronic records. Therefore,

the relevant parties are sounded a note of caution to utilize all means

available to them to ensure an efficient and effective process of

administration of justice.

In the instant case, the suspect has admitted that the said photograph

was uploaded by him on his Social Media Account, yet denies he had

any malicious intent therein. He also vehemently denies the purported

recovery of a sword and a hand grenade from his residence. This Court

notes the absence of any investigative material other than the IBEs

detailing of the circumstances of the initial arrest, which, in the

considered opinion of this Court, fails to provide justification for the

continued incarceration of the suspect.

BAL-0020-2022 Page 8 of 8 05/10/2022 IJ-40-22

In view of the above, it is the considered view of this Court that the

suspect be released on bail, subject to the bail conditions set out

below.

Bail conditions

1. Cash Bail of Rs 20,000/-

2. Two sureties to the value of 50,000/- each, as acceptable to the

Magistrate.

3. The suspect to report to the Police Station- Kodikamam on the 4th

Sunday of every month between 9.00am 3.00 pm.

4. Passport/Travel Document if any, to be surrendered to the

Magistrate Court of Chavakachcheri.

Registrar of this Court is directed to send a copy of this order to the

Magistrate Court of Chavakachcheri.

Bail granted.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Menaka Wijesundera J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL