==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0096/24

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: Piliduwa Bogahawattage Chandima

CA/HCC/0096/2024 Dilhani

High Court of Colombo

Case No: HC/115/2018

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

CA/HCC/0096/24

2 | P a g e

COUNSEL : Tilak Marapana, PC, with R.Y.D.

Jayasekara, Asela Muthumudali and

Chamith Marapana for the Appellant.

Sudharshana De Silva, ASG for the

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 19/09/2025

DECIDED ON : 31/10/2025

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted by the Attorney General in the High Court of

Colombo under Sections 3(1) of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act No.

05 of 2006 as amended by Act No. 40 of 2011 for executing a transaction,

that is, depositing Rs.13,968,802.66, such being the proceeds of the crime

of Heroin Trafficking, into a savings account bearing the Number:

100353783510 at the Sampath Bank, Thalawathugoda Branch.

Upon pleading guilty on the date of the trial, the Appellant was found guilty

as charged and was sentenced to 5 years rigorous imprisonment.

The Appellant is on bail and present in Court.

CA/HCC/0096/24

3 | P a g e

The only ground raised by the learned President’s Counsel is, that the

sentence is excessive given the circumstances of the case. As such, the

learned President’s Counsel submits that this is an appropriate case to be

considered as per the judgment given in SC Reference 03/2008 dated

15.10.2008 and SC Appeal 17/2012 dated 12.03.2015 by the Supreme

Court of Sri Lanka.

The Appellant was indicted under Section 3(1) of the Money Laundering Act

for depositing Rs. 13,968,802.66, which she was unable to explain how she

came into possession of.

On 27.11.2023 the Appellant had pleaded guilty to the charge and was

convicted accordingly. The State, in their submission, brought to the Court’s

notice, the gravity of the charge.

In the mitigation, the defence submitted that the Appellant is a mother of

two children and acted only on the instructions of her husband. As she was

not in a position to pay the high fine, as per the Money Laundering Act, the

learned High Court Judge had imposed the minimum sentence of five years

rigorous imprisonment against the Appellant.

The learned President’s Counsel for the Appellant contends that the

imposition of a minimum mandatory sentence or a mandatory sentence is

unconstitutional and hence despite the Statutes, the judiciary has the

discretion to impose an appropriate punishment. He heavily relied on the

Supreme Court Judgment given in the SC Reference 03/2008 (HC

Anuradhapura Case No.333/04) decided on 15/10/2008.

In the aforementioned SC Reference, the High Court of Anuradhapura by its

communication dated 14/05/2008, made a reference to the Supreme Court

in terms of Article 125(1) of the Constitution of Sri Lanka. In that reference,

the Learned High Court Judge of Anuradhapura had queried whether

Section 364(2) of the Penal Code as amended by the Penal Code (Amendment)

CA/HCC/0096/24

4 | P a g e

Act No.22 of 1995, had removed judicial discretion when sentencing an

accused convicted of an offence in terms of that section.

In the said reference, Justice P. A. Ratnayake held that:

“the minimum mandatory sentence in Section 364(2)(e) is in conflict with

Article 4(c),11, and 12(1) of the Constitution.”

“Article 80(3) (of the Constitution) only applies where the validity of an Act

is called into question. However, Article 80(3) does not prevent a court from

exercising its most traditional function of interpreting laws. Interpretation

of laws will often require a court to determine the applicable law in the

event of a conflict between two laws. This is a function that has been

exercised by this court from time immemorial.”

In the event of a conflict between an ordinary law and the Constitution, the

provisions must prevail over an ordinary law.”

“The minimum mandatory sentence in Section 364(2)(e) of the Penal Code

is in conflict with Article 4(e),11 and 12 of the Constitution and the High

Court is not inhibited from imposing a sentence that it deems appropriate

in the exercise of its judicial discretion notwithstanding the minimum

mandatory sentence.”

In the Attorney General v. Ambagala Mudiyanselage Samantha

Sampath S.C.Appeal No.17/2013 Eva Wanasundera, P.C.J, held that:

“I find that the issue in the present case is a conflict between the

provisions in an ordinary law, i.e., the Penal Code and the

provisions in the Constitution. The Constitution is accepted as the

Supreme Law of the country and the ordinary laws derive their

validity from the Constitution. The provisions in the ordinary law

should be interpreted in the light of the Constitutional provisions.

The Constitution should be used as a flashlight on the provisions

of the ordinary law. Any mandatory minimum sentence imposed

CA/HCC/0096/24

5 | P a g e

by the provisions of any ordinary law, in my view is in conflict

with Article 4(c), 11 and 12(1) of the Constitution in that it curtails

the judicial discretion of the judge hearing the case……..When a

minimum mandatory sentence is written in the law, the Court

loses its judicial discretion. That part of the law with the minimum

mandatory sentence, acts as a bar to judicial powers in

sentencing or punishing the wrong doer.”

In M.L.Rohana v. AG (SC. Appeal No.89A/2009) Amaratunga, J. too held

that the judicial discretion remained intact and reduced the custodial

sentence to that of a suspended sentence.

In countering the argument advanced by the Learned President’s Counsel for

the Appellant, the Learned Additional Solicitor General who appeared for the

Respondent contends that the judicial pronouncement of SC Reference

03/2008 which was in respect of a specific provision in another statute,

cannot be applied to the instant case.

It is very pertinent to mention the following Articles of the Constitution which

speak about the power of the Parliament.

As per the Article 4(a) of the Constitution of Sri Lanka, the Legislative power

is granted to the Parliament. The Article reads as follows:

“the legislative power of the People shall be exercised by Parliament,

consisting of elected representatives of the People and by the People at

a Referendum.”

Article 75 of the Constitution read as follows:

“Parliament shall have power to make laws, including laws having

retrospective effect and repealing or amending any provision of the

Constitution, or adding any provision to the Constitution:

Provided that Parliament shall not make any law,

CA/HCC/0096/24

6 | P a g e

a. Suspending the operation of the Constitution or any part

thereof; or

b. Repealing the Constitution as a whole unless such law enacts a

new Constitution to replace it.”

Hence the law-making power is granted to the Parliament.

Article 76 (1) of the Constitution read as follows:

“Parliament shall not abdicate or in any manner alienate its legislative

power and shall not set up any authority with any legislative power.”

Hence, Parliament shall not abdicate or in any manner alienate its legislative

power.

Further, the validity of a legislation passed by Parliament cannot be called

into question after the stage set out in Article 80(3) of the Constitution. The

said Article reads as follows:

“Where a Bill becomes law upon the certificate of the President or the

Speaker, as the case may be being endorsed thereon, no court or

tribunal shall inquire into, pronounce upon or in any manner call in

question, the validity of such Act on any ground whatsoever.”

Hence it is very clear that the Parliament has the exclusive legislative power

to enact law, which cannot be abdicated or alienated at any stage. Once a

law is passed and certified by the President or the Speaker as the case may

be, the said law cannot be questioned in any manner by the Court.

In Swasthika Textile Industries Ltd v Thantrige Dayaratne [1993] 2 SLR

348 where questions were raised, inter alia, as to the validity of the High

Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No.19 of 1990, Fernando, J.

declined to go into those issues noting that:

CA/HCC/0096/24

7 | P a g e

“In so far as the validity of those provisions is concerned, Article 80(3)

precludes this Court from inquiring into, pronouncing upon, or in any

manner calling in question, the validity of those provisions.”

In B. Sirisena Cooray v. Tissa Dias Bandaranayake and Two Others [1999]

1 SLR 1 where Act No.4 of 1978 which amended the Special Presidential

Commission of Inquiries law was being considered, Dheeraratne.J, stated

that:

“We are here certainly not inquiring into, pronouncing upon, or in any

manner calling in question, the validity of the Special Presidential

Commission of Inquiries Amendment Act No.4 of 1978 as contemplated

by Article 80(3). The Constitutional provision must prevail over normal

law.”

An important bench of five Justices of Supreme Court in Attorney General

and Others v. Sumathipala [2006] 2 SLR 126 held that:

“A judge cannot under a thin guise of interpretation usurp the

function of the legislature to achieve a result that the Judge thinks is

desirable in the interests of justice. Therefore, the role of the judge is to

give effect to the expressed intention of Parliament as it is the bounden

duty of any Court and the function of every Judge to do justice within

the stipulated parameters.”

Justice Dr. A. R. B. Amerasinghe in his book titled ‘Judicial Conduct,

Ethics and Responsibilities’ at page 284, expressed the view that:

“The function of a judge is to give effect to the expressed intention of

the Parliament. If legislation needs amendment, because it results in

injustice, the democratic process must be used to bring about the

change. This has been the unchallenged view expressed by the Court

of Sri Lanka for almost a hundred years.”

CA/HCC/0096/24

8 | P a g e

In the case of Kodithuwakkulage Pradeep Samantha alias Fredie SC

Appeal No.139/2014, SC (SPL) LA Application No.105/2014 decided on

21/11/2018 His Lordship Aluwihare, J. held that:

“As referred to earlier, this court however, is required to give effect to the

legislative provision and I quote with approval Henry Cecil (The English

Judge, Hamlyn Lectures,1970, pg.125), who expressed the view that,

“The object of every court must be to do justice within the law.

Admittedly the law sometimes forces an unjust decision. If there is no

way about it, it is for Parliament to alter the law if the injustice merits

an alteration.”

In the case of Attorney-General and others v. Sumathipala (Supra) Her

Ladyship Justice Dr. Shirani Bandaranayake (as she then was), in

considering the impact of Section 47 (1) of the Immigration and Emigration

Act on the liberty and freedom of an individual held that;

“However, it is to be noted that although the liberty and freedom of an

individual is thus restricted in terms of the provisions of Section 47(1) of

the Immigrants and Emigrants Act, that injustice cannot be cured by this

Court as it is for the legislature, viz., the Parliament to make necessary

amendments if there is a conflict between the specific provisions and

individual liberty.”

In Harrikissioon v. Attorney General of Trinidad and Tobago [1981] AC

265, Hyatali CJ stated that:

“He was firmly of the opinion that a Court would be acting improperly if

a perfectly clear ouster provision in the constitution of a country, which

is its supreme law is treated with little sympathy or scant respect, or is

ignored without strong and compelling reasons.”

The judicial decisions cited above and the given writings amply demonstrate

that the Parliament is the only place, which can enact laws and its

CA/HCC/0096/24

9 | P a g e

subsequent amendment by exercising the legislative power of the people and

the Court cannot, under the guise of interpretation, usurp the legislative

power.

The contention of the Learned President’s Counsel is that although, under

the provisions of the Prevention of Money Loundering Act, the minimum

sentence is five years rigorous imprisonment, it does not negate the Court’s

inherent powers to impose a suitable sentence.

In the SC Reference No.03 of 2008, the Supreme Court has considered a

specific provision in the Penal Code which is a separate enactment. In the

said reference, the Supreme Court mainly considered the imposition of a

minimum mandatory sentence under Section 364(2) of the Penal Code as

amended.

Therefore, I conclude that as the SC Reference No. 03 of 2008 was in

respect of a specific provision in another law, it cannot be applied to

provisions in the Prevention of Money Laundering Act. There is a difference

between the two laws, i.e., the Penal Code and the Money Laundering Act.

Hence, the sentence prescribed by the law under the Money Laundering Act

is not less than five years and not exceeding 20 years. Therefore, the court

is not empowered to deliver a sentence contrary to the stipulated punishment

under the guise of judicial discretion. Unless the nature of the offence is

altered, the judiciary cannot go against the express intentions of the

legislature declared through statutory provisions. Otherwise, by extension,

the court can impose any other sentence than death, for a person found

guilty of murder under Section 296 of the Penal Code.

Imposing any other sentence would amount to an opening of flood gates and

in turn, the judges would be indirectly enabled to decide the nature of the

offence not as provided by the legislature but according to their own personal

opinions. Nature of the offence cannot be indirectly altered by the tool of

judicial discretion.

CA/HCC/0096/24

10 | P a g e

Once the punishment is prescribed by law, then the judiciary cannot

interfere with it under the guise of discretion. Discretion can be exercised if

there is room left for that purpose by the legislature.

In the United Kingdom, life imprisonment has been classified into two

categories. The first category is lifelong imprisonment without parole and

under the second category the accused is entitled for parole after serving a

particular period in prison decided by the judge who sentenced the accused.

In Sri Lanka there is no such categorized provision pertaining to the

imposition of life imprisonment available in our regime of criminal laws. As

such, our courts can only impose one category of life imprisonment.

In Kodithuwakkulage Pradeep Samantha alias Fredie [Supra] Aluwihare

J correctly held:

“On the other hand, in the absence of any ambiguity, this court cannot

go beyond the literal construction of the statutory provision, which is the

primary rule of interpretation. If there is nothing to modify, alter or

qualify the language which the statute contains, it must be construed in

the ordinary and on natural meaning of the words and sentences. (Per

Lord Fitzgerald in the case of Bradlaugh v. Clerk [1883] 8 App. Cases

354.) The rule of construction is “to intend, the legislature to have meant

what they have actually expressed.” R v. Banbury (Inhabitants)

[1834] 1A and E 136 per Park J.

Next, the learned President’s Counsel made submissions in favour of the

imposition of a non-custodial sentence highlighting the below mentioned

documents.

1. United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for Non-custodial Measures

(Tokyo Rules).

2. The Bangkok Rules.

3. Information notes for Criminal Justice Practitioners on Non-custodial

Measures for Women Offenders (UNODC).

CA/HCC/0096/24

11 | P a g e

4. A Smarter Approach to Sentencing- England and Wales.

5. Reducing female admissions to custody: Exploring the options at

Sentencing.

Although the learned President’s Counsel made submissions in support of

such a Non-custodial Sentence, it is my considered view that the imposition

of any other sentence other than stipulated in the relevant Act, will amount

to usurping of the legislative power of the Parliament.

As the learned High Court Judge had carefully considered the grounds of

mitigation raised by the Appellant, this court is not inclined to accept the

contentions raised by the learned President’s Counsel, on behalf of the

Appellant.

Therefore, I affirm the conviction and the sentence imposed by the High

Court Judge. The Appeal is dismissed.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Colombo along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL