I I I

~ I I I I

~

I

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Case No. C.A. (PHC) 210/2009

H.C. Badulla Case No. 34/2007 (Writ)

In the matter of an appeal against the order dated

16/06/2009 of the High Court of the Uva Province

situated at Badulla in writ application bearing no.

34/2007 in terms of Rule 11(2) of the Court of

Appeal (Procedure for Appeals from High Courts

Rules 1988)

1. Dr. S. V. W. T. Ranasinghe,

2. Dr.N.W. Kahandage

Both of No. 236, Heeloya Road,

Thanthiriya, Bandarawela.

Petitioners-Appellants

Vs.

1. Bandarawela Pradeshiya Sabha,

Office of the Bandarawela Pradeshiya Sabha,

Bandarawela,

Bandarawela Municipal Council,

Bandarawela.

Substituted 1st Respondent-Respondent

2. Medical Officer of Health,

Office of the Medical Officer of Health,

Bandarawela.

3. Public Health Inspector,

Kingama, Bandarawela.

4. W.A .. J. Gunesinghe,

No. 245, Thanthiriya,

Bandarawela.

1

Before: K.K. Wickremasinghe J.

Janak De Silva J.

Counsel:

lasith Chaminda for Petitioners-Appellants

5. T.M.I. Gunesinghe,

No. 245, Thanthiriya,

Bandarawela.

Respondents-Respondents

W. Dayaratne P.e. with R. Jaywardena for Substituted 1st Respondent-Respondent

Indula Ratnayake State Counsel for 2nd and 3rd Respondents-Respondents

Saliya Pieris P.e. with Varuna De Saram for the 4th and 5th Respondents-Respondents

Written Submissions tendered on:

Substituted 1st Respondent-Respondent on 27th April 2018

4th and 5th Respondents-Respondents on 23rd March 2018

2nd and 3rd Respondents-Respondents on 29th March 2018

Argued on: 19th February 2018

Decided on: 30th May 2018

Janak De Silva J.

This is an appeal against the judgement of the learned High Court Judge of Badulla dated 16th

June 2009.

2

The Petitioners-Appellants (Appellants) and the 4th and 5th Respondents-Respondents (4th and 5th

Respondents) are neighbours. The Appellants contend that the 4th and 5th Respondents began

constructing a building connecting the walls of the new building to the retention wall of the

Appellants without keeping an open space as required by law thereby affecting their well and

soakage pit. The Appellants claim that the 1st to 3rd Respondents-Respondents (1st to 3rd

Respondents) had granted approval to the 4th and 5th Respondents to construct the said building

which was commercial in nature in contravention of the provisions of the Housing and Town

Improvement Ordinance (as amended) and the regulations made thereunder.

The Appellants filed the above action in the High Court of the Uva Province holden in Badulla and

sought, inter alia, the following reliefs:

(a) A writ of certiorari quashing the approval given by the Pradeshiya Sabha, Bandarawela

to the building application of the 4th and 5th Respondents

(b) A writ of mandamus rejecting the building application of the 4th and 5th Respondents

and directing them to demolish the unauthorized constructions

The position of the Bandarwaela Pradeshiya Sabha and the 4th and 5th Respondents is that the 4th

and 5th Respondents sought permission to construct a commercial building and the approval

given thereto does not violate any provision in the Housing and Town Improvement Ordinance

(as amended) and the regulations made thereunder.

The learned High Court Judge has accepted this position. He was also of the view that the

Appellants had suppressed and/or misrepresented material facts. On that basis the application

of the Appellants was dismissed with costs. Hence this appeal by the Appellants.

This application was taken up for argument on 19.02.2018. Parties agreed that the application

can be disposed by way of written submissions. All parties except the Appellants have filed

written submissions.

3

The Appellants did not clearly specify in the petition filed before the High Court the specific

provisions of law alleged to have been violated when approval was granted to the 4th and 5th

Respondents. However, in the written submissions filed in the High Court they advert to proviso

2 to Rule 4 of the Schedule to the Housing and Town Improvement Ordinance (as amended) as

the relevant provision.

Rule 3 therein reads as follows:

"3. Every habitable room in a residential building must comply with the following

conditions" (emphasis added)

Rule 4 states that:

"Where a window or door necessary for the purpose of compliance with rule 3 is

situated ..... "

On a plain and literal reading of these provisions it is clear that they apply to "residential

buildings". The building for which approval has been granted in the instant case is a commercial

building.

The Appellants are relying on proviso 2 to Rule 4 of the Schedule. This is not possible as the main

provision is applicable to a residential building and the proviso cannot extend to a commercial

building. Bindra states as follows:

"The proviso cannot possibly deal with an entirely different topic or subject and it is sub-

servient to the main provision"!

1 Bindra, Interpretation of Statutes, 7th ed. P. 79

4

In Senanayake, and another v. Mahindasoma and others2 G.P.S. De Silva c.J. stated that:

liThe proviso is an ancient formula. It enables a general statement to be made as a clear

proposition, any necessary qualifications being kept out of it and relegated to the proviso.

This aids understanding. The formula beginning 'Provided that .. .' is placed at the end of

a section or sub-section of an Act, or a paragraph or sub-paragraph of a schedule; and the

intention of which is to narrow the effect of the preceding words. (Francis Bennion,

Statutory Interpretation, 1984, p. 570). The emphasis is mine. N. S. Bindra, Interpretation

of Statutes, 7th Ed., p. 79, explains that a proviso relates to the subject-matter of the

principal clause. He states that: The proviso cannot possibly deal with an entirely different

topic or subject and it is sub-servant to the main provision. He adds that it is a cardinal

rule of interpretation that a proviso to a particular provision of a statute 'only embraces

the field which is covered by the main provision. It carves out an exception to the main

provision to which it has been enacted as a proviso and to no other. Later, Bindra states

that although at times it is used to introduce independent legislation, the presumption is

that, in accordance with its primary purpose, it refers only to the provisions to which it is

attached. Ordinarily, a proviso to a section is intended to take out a part of the main

section for special treatment; it is not expected to enlarge the scope of the main section."3

Accordingly, I am of the view that proviso 2 to Rule 4 of the Schedule to the Housing and Town

Improvement Ordinance (as amended) has no application to the instant case.

The learned High Court Judge further concluded that the Appellants were guilty of suppression

and/or misrepresentation of material facts.

2 (1998) 2 SrLL.R. 333

3 Ibid. page 344

5

.

It is trite law that discretionary relief will be refused by Court without going into the merits if

there has been suppression and/or misrepresentation of material facts. It is necessary in this

context to refer to the following passage from the judgment of Pathirana J in W. S. Alphonso

Appuhamy v. Hettiarachchi4:

liThe necessity of a full and fair disclosure of all the material facts to be placed before the

Court when, an application for a writ or injunction, is made and the process of the Court

is invoked is laid down in the case of the King v. The General Commissioner for the

Purpose of the Income Tax Acts for the District of Kensington-Ex-parte Princess Edmorbd

de Poigns Although this case deals with a writ of prohibition the principles enunciated are

applicable to all cases of writs or injunctions. In this case a Divisional Court without dealing

with the merits of the case discharged the rule on the ground that the applicant had

suppressed or misrepresented the facts material to her application. The Court of Appeal

affirmed the decision of the Divisional Court that there had been a suppression of material

facts by the applicant in her affidavit and therefore it was justified in refusing a writ of

prohibition without going into the merits of the case. In other words, so rigorous is the

necessity for a full and truthful disclosure of all material facts that the Court would not go

into the merits of the application but will dismiss it without further examination".

This principle has been followed consistently in Hulangamuwa v. Siriwardena, Principal, Visakha

Vidyalayaand others 5, Collettes Ltd. v. Commissioner of Labour and another6, Laub v. Attorney

General and another7, Blanca Diamonds (Pvt) Ltd. v Wilfred Van Elsand two others8, Jaysinghe v

The National Institute of Fisheries and Nautical Engineering (NIFNE) and another9, Dahanayake

477 N.L.R. 131 at 135,6

5 (1986) 1 SrLL.R.275

6 (1989) 2 SrLL.R. 6

7 (1995) 2 SrLL.R. 88

8 (1997) 1 SrLL.R. 360

9 (2002) 1 SrLL.R. 277

6

.\

and Others v. Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation Ltd. and OtherslO and Lt. Commander Ruwan

Pathirana v. Commodore Dharmasiriwardene & Othersll.

The following facts and documents have been suppressed and/or misrepresented by the

Appellants:

(a) The fact that the building is a commercial building

(b) The fact that District Court of Bandarawela Case No. SP/273 was filed and

subsequently withdrawn

(c) The fact that another case bearing District Court of Bandarawela Case No. 1848/L was

filed prior to the institution of the writ application

I am of the view that the above are material facts to the instant case and the application of the

Appellants was liable to be dismissed in limine for these reasons. The learned High Court judge

was correct in concluding that the Appellants have suppressed and/or misrepresented material

facts.

For the foregoing reasons, I see no reason to interfere with the judgement of the learned High Court

Judge of Badulla dated 16th June 2009.

Appeal is dismissed with costs.

K.K. Wickremasinghe J.

1(2005) 1 SrLL.R. 67 11(2007) 1 SrLL.R. 24

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Judge of the Court of Appeal

7