CA BAIL 0061-2025

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for

bail in terms of Section 83(2) of the

Amended Act No.41 of 2022 to the

Poisons, Opium and Dangerous

Drugs Ordinance No.17 of 1929.

Court of Appeal Bail Application The Officer-in-Charge

No.CA Bail/0061/25 Police Narcotics Bureau

MC Maligakanda Colombo-01

Case No. B 1356/2024 COMPLAINANT

1. Anuradhapura Gamage Rangana

2. Liyanage Nirosha Sumith Kumara

(Presently in remand)

SUSPECTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

Weeraperuma Athukoralage

Dilhani Chethana

No.44/16 G, Symonds Road,

Colombo-10.

PETITIONER

Vs.

CA BAIL 0061-2025

2 | P a g e

1. The Officer-in Charge

Police Narcotics Bureau

Colombo-01.

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

2. The Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo-12.

RESPONDENT

Anuradhapura Gamage Rangana

1st SUSPECT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

Pradeep Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Nihara Randeniya for the Petitioner.

Tharaka Kodagoda, SC for the

Respondents.

ARGUED ON : 23/09/2025.

DECIDED ON : 15/10/2025.

*****************************

CA BAIL 0061-2025

3 | P a g e

ORDER

P.Kumararatnam,J.

The Petitioner filing this Application has invoked the jurisdiction of this

Court to grant bail to her husband who is the 1st Suspect (Hereinafter

referred to as the Suspect) in this case upon suitable condition as this

Court considers appropriate.

The Suspect was arrested on 04.01.2024 by the Police officers attached

to the Police Narcotics Bureau, Colombo-01. He was produced before the

Magistrate of Maligakanda in the case bearing No. B/1536/2024.

Upon an information, police officers attached to the Police Narcotics

Bureau had arrested the Suspect at Deans Road, Maradana and

recovered 730 grams of Methamphetamine (Gross) from the Suspect.

Upon interrogation, the officers had arrested the 2nd Suspect on the same

day.

The Suspect and the 2nd Suspect were produced and facts were reported

to the Maligakanda Magistrate under Sections 54A (d) and (b) of the

Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended by the Act

No.13 of 1984.

The production had been sent to the Government Analyst Department

and after analysis, the Government Analyst had forwarded the report to

the Maligakanda Magistrate Court. According to the Government

Analyst, 329.5 grams of pure Methamphetamine had been detected from

the substance sent for the analysis.

The Petitioner has pleaded following exceptional circumstances in

support of her Bail Application.

1. The Suspect was arrested without justifiable reasons as nothing

recovered from him.

CA BAIL 0061-2025

4 | P a g e

2. The complainant has failed to state the exact place where the illegal

substance said to have found from the Suspect in the initial B

Report dated 05.01.2024.

3. The Suspect has been in remand custody little more than 22

months.

4. The Suspect is the sole breadwinner of the family.

The Learned State Counsel submitted that the delay is not an exceptional

circumstance to be considered to enlarge the suspect on bail. Further,

the time spent for preparing the indictment does not constitute an

exceptional circumstance. According to the State, investigation notes

have not been received by the Attorney General’s Department up to now.

The suspect is in remand little more than 22 months. The Government

Analyst Report is dated 28.05.2024. Although, more than one year has

passed, the investigation notes pertaining to this case has not been

received by the Attorney General’s Department. According to Government

Analyst Report, the pure quantity of Methamphetamine detected is 394.9

grams.

Exceptional circumstances are not defined in the statute. Hence, what is

exceptional circumstances must be considered on its own facts and

circumstances on a case-by-case basis.

In Ramu Thamodarampillai v. The Attorney General [2004] 3 SLR

180 the court held that:

“the decision must in each case depend on its own peculiar facts and

circumstances”.

In CA(PHC)APN 107/2018 decided on 19.03.2019 the court held that

remanding for a period of one year and five months without being served

with the in indictment was considered inter alia in releasing the suspect

CA BAIL 0061-2025

5 | P a g e

on bail. According to the Petitioner, at present her family is going through

untold hardship without proper income and care.

The Section 83 of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Act

which was amended by Act No. 41 of 2022 states:

83. (1) Subject to the provisions of sections 84, 85 and subsection (2) of

this section, a person suspected or accused of an offence under sections

54A and 54B of this Ordinance, shall not be released on bail by the High

Court except in exceptional circumstances.

(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 84 and 85, a person

suspected or accused of an offence under subsection (1) of section 54A

and section 54B-

(a) of which the pure quantity of the dangerous drug, trafficked,

imported, exported, or possessed is ten grammes or above in terms

of the report issued by the Government Analyst under section 77A;

and

(b) which is punishable with death or life imprisonment, shall not be

released on bail except by the Court of Appeal in exceptional

circumstances.

shall not be released on bail except by the Court of Appeal in exceptional

circumstances.

In this case the pure quantity of Methamphetamine detected in the

production by the Government Analyst is 394.9 grams. Hence, this court

has jurisdiction to consider granting of bail as per the new amendment.

The Learned Counsel for the Petitioner urged this Court to consider that

detaining a suspect without any legal action for an extended period of

time amounts to a violation of his fundamental rights which can be

considered as an exceptional ground.

Although the Suspect has several previous convictions related to drugs,

all the case are concluded in the Magistrate Court. He has no pending

CA BAIL 0061-2025

6 | P a g e

matters at present. This ground cannot be considered justifiable to detain

him further as the investigation notes has not been received by the

Attorney General’s Department. It is very pertinent to note that the

Government Analyst Report pertaining to this case is dated 28.05.2024

but the indictment has not been considered up to now.

The learned State Counsel informs that she is unable to predict the date

of receival of IBEs from the Police Narcotics Bureau. As such, it is

uncertain as to when the indictment would be forwarded to the relevant

High Court.

In Nasher v. Director of Public Prosecution [2020] VSCA 144 the court

held that:

“a combination of delay, onerous custodial conditions, and the

relative weakness of the prosecution case may, when considered with

all relevant circumstances, compel the conclusion that exceptional

circumstances have been established”. [Emphasis added]

The right to trial without undue delay is found in numerous international

and regional human rights instruments; for example, the International

Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Article 14(3)(c), the American

Convention on Human Rights (Article 8(1), the African Charter on Human

and People’s Rights (Article 7(1)(d), and the European Convention for the

Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (Article 6(1).

When a person is kept in remand without considering his or her case for

consideration for a considerable period of time, he or she should be

released on bail pending trial. Otherwise, this will lead not only to prison

overcrowding but also violates his or her fundamental rights which have

been guaranteed under the Constitution.

Hence, I consider the delay more than 22 months in remand falls into the

category of excessive and oppressive delay considering the circumstances

of this case. Hence, considering all the circumstances of this case, the

suspect has very good exceptional circumstances to consider this

CA BAIL 0061-2025

7 | P a g e

application in his favour. Further, remanding a suspect without taking

any legal action will prejudice his or her rights and family as well.

Offences under Section 54A(d) and 54A(b) of the Poisons Opium and

Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended by the Act No.13 of 1984 is no

doubt serious offences but seriousness of the offence alone cannot form

a ground to refuse bail. In considering these matters, the court must bear

in mind the presumption of innocence.

Further, bail should never be withheld as punishment. Granting of bail

is primarily at the discretion of the Court. The discretion should be

exercised with due care and caution taking into account the facts and

circumstances of each case.

Considering all these factors into account, especially the period in

remand, uncertainty of considering the case materials and the

circumstances of the case, I consider this is an appropriate case to grant

bail to the Suspect. Hence, I order the Suspect be granted bail with

following strict conditions.

1. Cash bail of Rs.200,000/=.

2. To provide 03 sureties. They must sign a bond of Rupees two

million each. The Petitioner should be one of the sureties.

3. The Suspect and the sureties must reside in the address given until

conclusion of his case.

4. Not to approach any prosecution witnesses directly or indirectly or

to interfere with.

5. To surrender his passport if any, to court and not to apply for a

travel document. The Controller of the Immigration and Emigration

is informed of the travel ban on the suspect.

6. To report to the Police Narcotics Bureau on the 2nd and last Sunday

of every month between 9am to 1pm.

7. Any breach of these conditions is likely to result in the cancellation

of his bail.

CA BAIL 0061-2025

8 | P a g e

The Bail Application is allowed and the Learned Magistrate of

Maligakanda is hereby directed to enlarge the suspect on bail on the

above bail conditions.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this bail order to the

Magistrate Court of Maligakanda and the Officer-in-Charge, Police

Narcotics Bureau, Colombo-01.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Pradeep Hettiarchchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL