1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under and in terms of Section 331(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 read with Article 139 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. Complainant Court of Appeal Case No. CA HCC 0077/2018 Vs. High Court of Colombo Case No. HC 7521/2014

Don Nuwan Priyantha Nanayakkara Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Don Nuwan Priyantha Nanayakkara Accused-Appellant Vs.

2

Hon. Attorney General, Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12

Complainant-Respondent

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran, J. Amal Ranaraja, J.

Counsel: Rienzie Arsecularatne, P.C. with Namal Karunaratne for the

Accused-Appellant. Akila Dalpadatu, S.C. for the Respondent.

Argued on: 11.03.2025 Decided on: 04.04.2025

JUDGMENT

AMAL RANARAJA, J,

1. The Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant) has

been indicted in the High Court of Colombo in High Court case no.

7521/2014.

2. The charges in the indictment are as follows;

i. That on or about 13.08.2013, at Sedawatha, within the

jurisdiction of this Court, you did traffic 02.39 grams of Diacetyl

Morphine (in other words heroin), an offence punishable in terms

3

of section 54 A (b) of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs

Ordinance as amended by Act No.13 of 1984.

ii. During the course of the same transaction, you did possess 02.39

grams of Diacetyl Morphine, an offence punishable in terms of

section 54 A (d) of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs

Ordinance as amended by Act No. 13 of 1984.

3. At the conclusion of the trial, the Learned High Court Judge has

convicted the appellant of the charges in the indictment and sentenced

him to life imprisonment.

4. The appellant being aggrieved by the conviction together with the

sentencing order has preferred the instant appeal to this Court.

Case of the prosecution;

5. PW1 (Sub-inspector Anthony) has received a tip from an informant on

13.08.2013 regarding an individual trafficking narcotics in the

Sedawatha area. PW1 has informed his superior at the camp about the

4

tip. Following his superiors advice PW1 has left the camp with a team of

officers to conduct a raid. Upon receiving further information from the

informant, they have set up a road block on the Wellampitiya road at the

Katupelalla area. They have stopped a three-wheel scooter and searched

the driver who had been identified as the appellant. During the search,

PW1 has recovered a pink plastic bag from the appellants possession.

Inside this bag there had been eight other small packets containing a

brown coloured powdered substance. PW1 has identified such powdered

substance as a heroin mixed with other materials and taken the

appellant into custody.

Case of the appellant;

6. The appellant has categorically denied the narrative surrounding the

alleged incident. He has asserted that he has been wrongfully implicated

by the police, maintaining that the evidence presented against him is not

only inaccurate but also fabricated.

Grounds of appeal;

7. The Learned Counsel for the appellant has urged the following grounds

of appeal;

i. The prosecutions story is not tenable (improbable).

5

ii. A proper adoption of evidence under section 48 of the

Judicature Act No. 02 of 1978 (as amended) has not been done

by the succeeding High Court Judge.

iii. The Learned High Court Judge has altered the proceedings on

16.02.2018 and 20.02.2018 without the consent of the

prosecution and/or the defence.

iv. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to consider the

significance of the discrepancy as regards to the weight of the

substance purportedly recovered by PW1 and of that sent to

the Government Analyst for analysis.

8. PW1 (Sub-inspector Anthony) being an officer attached to the Police

Special Task Force had been tasked with the security of important

government officials even though he had not been involved in providing

security to a particular official as a personal security officer. Therefore, it

is possible that he engaged in raids in addition to his normal duties. PW1

as the officer in charge of the raiding party would have decided the

manner in which a raid would be carried out. It would have been the

prerogative of PW1 that was relevant. Hence, the decision of PW1 to take

6

the appellant to the Narcotics Bureau instead of the nearest Police Station

and also not to conduct further investigations to apprehend the original

source of the narcotic substance recovered from the possession of the

appellant.

9. Further, in SC APPEAL 139/2019, SC APPEAL 02/2022 and

SC/SPL/LA/267/2018 decided on 05.04.2024, Samayawardhena, J,

has held that an application as per the provisions in the proviso to

section 48 of the Judicature Act No.02 of 1978 (as amended) should be

made by the accused concerned for a Court to consider as to whether it

should allow such an application. It has been stated by

Samayawardhena, J, that,

As I have already stated, whether or not the accused is

represented by a lawyer, under the principal part of section

48, the judge decides whether or not to resummons the

witnesses and commence the proceedings afresh. In the High

Court trials on indictments, the accused is necessarily

represented by a lawyer. For the judge to act upon the proviso

to section 48, there must be an application by the accused.

The failure to make an application by the accused cannot be

7

attributed to the judge and quash the entire proceedings,

including the judgment pronounced after a protracted trial.

10. In this instance the appellant has not submitted an application to any

of the successor judges requesting that a witness be re-summoned and

re-heard. Therefore, the necessity to consider such an application has

not arisen. The proceedings do not indicate the fact that such an

application has been made by the appellant.

11. Corrections of proceedings could also refer to the rectification of clerical

mistakes or inaccuracies that arise during a judicial process. Clerical

errors are typographical or transcription errors that may affect the

substantive rights of the parties involved.

12. The process of correcting proceedings generally involves the following

steps;

i. The parties in the case or the legal representatives must

identify and document the nature of error,

8

ii. The aggrieved party typically should file a motion in the Court

that presided over the case outlining the specific error and

proposed correction,

iii. Thereafter such motion, supported in the particular Court,

iv. A hearing may be scheduled if necessary allowing both

parties to present their arguments,

v. The Court shall thereafter render a decision on the motion,

either granting or denying the request for correction.

vi. If granted, the Court can issue an order specifying the

corrections to be made and proceed to correct the

typographical or transcriptional errors in open Court in the

presence of both parties.

13. In the recent proceeding, the Learned High Court Judge has not followed

the established process for correcting the proceedings. Proper adherence

to a process is crucial in a judicial system; deviations can result in

misinterpretations of facts. The failure to comply with a process could

9

also undermine the integrity of the judicial process and can have serious

ramifications for the parties involved.

14. The corrections made by the High Court Judge include to those

markings given to items produced as evidence and the gross quantity of

the powdered substance purportedly recovered from the possession of

the appellant. However, evidence with regard to those items produced

and the gross quantity of the powdered substance recovered are stated in

the proceedings recorded previously. The Learned High Court Judge has

rectified some clerical errors only so that the relevant facts would align

with those recorded previously. In those circumstances, the misdirection

on the part of the Learned High Court Judge has not occasioned in a

failure of justice in the mind of this Court.

15. The Learned Presidents Counsel has also contended that the Learned

High Court Judge has failed to consider the significance of the

discrepancy between the weight of the powdered substance recovered by

PW1 and the quantity that was recovered by the Government Analyst for

analysis. It has also been contended that the Learned High Court Judge

has unreasonably through presumptions or assumptions has held that

the only way that the discrepancy pertaining to the weight of the

10

powdered substance could arise as a result of defective weighting arising

from the lack of training of the officer concerned without considering that

the appellant is not in any way responsible for those lapses on the part of

the prosecution.

[vide page 26 of the High Court Judgment dated 20.02.2018]

16. The gross weight of the powdered substance allegedly recovered from the

possession of the appellant has been 09.09 grams, while the weight

determined by the Government Analyst is only 07.12 grams. The

prosecution has failed to explain such discrepancy in this case. The

discrepancy is not only significant but it run through the prosecutions

case. Such omission also raises critical concerns regarding the

prosecutions arguments and overall credibility.

17. An unexplained discrepancy that goes unexplained would undermine

the credibility of a party involved in a case as it would not tend to

11

produce clear and consistent evidence. A Judge could draw adverse

inferences from the unexplained discrepancy potentially leading to a

decision that favours the opposing party. Further, a Judge may

disregard the evidence associated with the discrepancy entirely deeming

it unreliable or untrustworthy for making a legal determination. Overall,

it is critical to address discrepancies thoroughly to maintain clarity,

uphold credibility and ensure just outcomes in legal proceedings.

Further, when a Judge bases his decision on presumptions or

assumptions that could misrepresent facts leading to an unfair

judgment. Assumptions are often based on incomplete information or

stereotypes which can lead to misconceptions. Making judgment without

a full understanding or evidence can result in misinterpretation of facts.

It is important to seek clarity and context before forming conclusion. This

allows for fairer and more accurate evaluation of situations.

18. In Kumaravel Yoganadan alias Yoga vs. The Hon. Attorney

General CA HCC 0468/2017, P. Kumararatnam, J, has stated,

When this Court invited the Respondent to explain

regarding weight discrepancy transpired from the evidence, the

Senior Deputy Solicitor General following the best traditions and

12

highest standard admitted the weight discrepancy in the production

and further added that he is unable to explain the reason.

In this regard the Learned High Court Judge in his judgment

had made general comments about weight discrepancies in cases of

this nature. In absence of the evidence led regarding this particular

point; the comment made by the Learned High Court has no doubt

caused great prejudice to a fair trial

19. This incident has occurred in 2013, therefore, it is further noted that

12 years have lapsed since the alleged commission of the offences.

Hence, it does not seem just to call upon the appellant to defend himself

after an unconscionable lapse of time.

20. In P. M. Peter Singho vs. M. B. Werapitiya 55 NLR 155 at page 157,

Gratiaen, J, has stated,

I have anxiously considered whether I should send the

case back for re-trial before another Magistrate. The charges

against the accused are of serious nature and it may be that,

upon the relevant and admissible evidence, his conviction

13

would have been justified. But we are here concerned with

offences alleged to have been committed over four years ago

and it does not seem to me just to call upon him to defend

himself a second time after such an unconscionable lapse of

time. I, therefore, set aside the conviction and acquit the

accused.

21. In The Queen vs. G. K. Jayasinghe 69 NLR 314 at page 328,

Sansoni, J, has stated,

we have considered whether we should order a new

trial in this case. We do not take that course, because there

has been a lapse of three years since the commission of the

offences, and because of our own view of the unreliable

nature of the accomplices evidence on which alone the

prosecution case rests.

We accordingly direct that the judgment of acquittal be

entered.

14

22. Due to the matters discussed above, it is the opinion of this Court that

the fourth ground of appeal urged by the appellant has merit. Hence, the

decision of this Court to interfere with the impugn judgment together

with the sentencing order. I accordingly set aside the conviction together

with the impugned sentence and acquit the appellant of the charges in

the indictment.

Appeal allowed.

23. The Registrar of this Court is directed to communicate this judgment to

the High Court of Colombo for compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

B. SASI MAHENDRAN, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal