==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Orders in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus

under Article 140 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Kalimutthu Ramesh,

No. 307/B/1/D, Udaragama, Panvila,

Wanduramba, Galle.

On behalf of

Ramesh Gershon Ezekiel (Minor)

CA (Writ) App. No. 319/2024

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. P.S. Pushpakumara,

Principal, Richmond College, Galle.

2. President of the Appeal Board,

Richmond College, Galle.

3. Mr. Prabath Nalaka,

Director of National Schools, Ministry of Education, "Isurupaya", Battaramulla.

4. Ms. J.M Thilaka Jayasundara,

2

Secretary to the Minister of Education, Ministry of Education, "Isurupaya", Battaramulla. 5. Dr. Susil Premajayantha,

Minister of Education, Ministry of Education, "Isurupaya", Battaramulla.

5A. Ms. Harini Nireka Amarasuriya,

Minister of Education, Ministry of Education, “Isurupaya”, Battaramulla.

6. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department, Hulfsdorp, Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

Before: Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Counsel:

Lakshan Dias with Maneesha Kumarasinghe and Shaneli Kumarasinghe for the Petitioner.

Zuhri Zain, D.S.G. for the Respondents.

Argued on: 10.02.2026

Delivered on: 02.04.2026

3

Dr. D.F.H. Gunawardhana, J.

Judgement

Introduction

The Petitioner is the father of a child for whom he sought admission to Richmond College, Galle.

He has submitted the application on behalf of the child to be admitted to the school under the Chief

Occupant (CO) category and alternatively under the Religious category too. The Petitioner and

child, being a non-Catholic Christians, sought admission to Richmond College, which was also

run by the Wesleyan Missionary prior to the vesting of the said school in the Government.

However, the school authorities have refused to admit the child on the basis that the Petitioner has

failed to establish his permanent residence at the address given. His appeal was also rejected on

the same basis. Thus, the Petitioner seeks to challenge the same by this Application.

After issuing formal notice, the Respondents have filed their Objections; according to which, the

main Objections taken on behalf of the Respondents is that the Petitioner has failed to establish his

residence at the address given since he does not have a deed or any other valid document to prove

his title to the property concerned.

This was argued before me on 10.02.2026, and the following arguments were advanced by the

counsel; hence, this judgement.

Arguments

The thrust of the main argument advanced by Mr. Lakshan Dias, the Counsel for and on behalf of

the Petitioner is that in both connected matters, the Petitioner is entitled to admit his child to the

school on CO category as well as the religious category. The Petitioner being a non-Catholic

4

Christian, has established that he is entitled to admit his child to Richmond College as it was run

prior to the vesting, by the Wesleyan Missionary. Secondly, the Petitioner has been allocated a

parcel of land by the Land Reforms Commission of an estate which belongs to it; the transfer deeds

are pending in respect of the same land. Therefore, the Petitioner can claim and rely upon the

documents issued by the Land Reforms Commission and other relevant authorities of the

Government, including the Electoral Registry.

On the other hand, Ms. Zain argued that the Petitioner is not qualified to have his son admitted to

the school on the basis that he does not have a proper deed or any other document to claim the

connection with the residence he is claiming to reside in.

Factual matrix

The Petitioner is the father of a child for whom the Petitioner seeks admission to the Richmond

College of Galle. The Petitioner claims that he is a permanent resident in the close vicinity of the

said school, identified as the ‘feeder area’.

Richmond College, admittedly being foundered in 1814, started its operations as a school in 1876.

Before it was vested in the Government as a school under the Assisted Schools and Training

Colleges (Special Provisions) Act, No. 5 of 1960, it remained a school run by the Wesleyan

Missionary, a Christian Missionary of Protestant denomination, not of Catholic. After vesting the

school with the Government, it remains as an assisted school, and therefore, it remains as a school

governed by the relevant laws and circulars issued thereunder; when it comes to admissions, it is

also governed by the relevant laws and circulars issued by the Ministry of Education.

Presently, the Petitioner claims that the relevant circular of admission issued by the Ministry of

Education is marked and annexed to the Petition as P4(a). According to which, the Petitioner is

5

eligible to apply as a resident who resides within the ‘feeder area’ of the school and is further

eligible to apply under the religious category as well, for which a quota is allocated as prior to the

vesting of the school remained as a school run by a missionary of a particular religion. Therefore,

the Petitioner claims that he, his wife, and his son for whom the admission is sought to the school

are Christians and remain as non-Catholic Christians. The Petitioner also claims that he resides in

a house situated in the ‘Lelwala Estate’, which belongs to the Land Reforms Commission since it

is also vested with the Land Reforms Commission under the Land Reforms law; a parcel of land

is now identified and allocated to be given to him, where he and his family resides. In proof thereof,

he has annexed several documents to the Petition, including the electoral registry, the Grama

Sevaka certificate, and a letter issued by the Land Reforms Commission which states that the said

parcel of land had been allocated to him (the father of the child) and he resides in the same house.

In addition to that, the Divisional Secretary of the area has also issued a letter to that effect.

The Petitioner further asserts that the only other Christian school that is situated within feeder area

of his house and Richmond College is the Christ Church College, which is only a Roman-Catholic

school; therefore, his eligibility is with regard to the admission to Richmond College, being a

Christian of different denomination other than Roman-Catholism is established.

As such, the Petitioner claims that he is eligible to obtain at least forty-five (45) marks, even after

the deduction of five marks due to the situation of the Christ Church College in between the

Richmond College and his residential house. Though he sought his admission, the school

authorities have denied and rejected it due to the lack of proof of his permanent residence as he

claimed. His appeal was also rejected. Therefore, he has sought the intervention of this Court to

obtain the admission for his child.

6

However, the Respondents have filed their Objections; according to which, the Petitioner has not

established his residence according to the required rules of the Circular No. 29/2023 as annexed

to the Petition marked as P4(a); therefore, the Petitioner is not eligible to obtain admission for his

son to grade one of Richmond College, and moved for the dismissal of this Application.

In this case, the Petitioner has been denied admitting his child to Richmond College mainly on the

basis that the residence is not proved or that they are not entitled to claim permanent residency at

the place where he claims to be residing.

The Petitioner has marked his marking sheet indicating the aggregate of marks that he should have

obtained at the interview. The said marking sheet is marked and annexed to the Petition as P8.

According to the Petitioner, the total marks that he should have obtained is ninety-one out of one

hundred. However, his application for the admission of his son has been rejected as per the said

document marked as P8; even his appeal to the Board of Appeal has also been rejected, and

according to the remarks given in the said document marked as P8, the Petitioner has failed to

establish his residence at the address given.

On a perusal of the documents annexed to the Petition marked as P6(a) to P6(i), the Petitioner

claims that he has established his residence at the address given. Now I will consider the said

documents individually.

The document marked as P6(a) is the Grama Sevaka Certificate issued to the Petitioner for the

purpose of admitting his son to the said school, and according to which, the Petitioner has been

living at the address given in the caption which is the same as the address given in the school

admission application marked as P5; namely, No. 307/B/1/D, Udaragama, Panvila, Wanduramba,

Galle.

7

The same address has been used to obtain his Savings Account Passbook, which is marked as

P6(b) annexed to the Petition. In addition to that, by the document marked as P6(c), the Petitioner

has established that he is a resident at the address given in the caption as a registered voter of the

address registered from 2005 to the date of submitting the application.

The document marked as P6(d), is the Petitioner’s marriage certificate while the document marked

as P6(e) is a document issued by the Director of the Land Reforms Commission, by which it is

certified that the relevant land occupied and possessed by the Petitioner is allocated to him and

pending the final transfers.

The document marked as P6(f)(i) to P6(f)(v) are letters issued by the Land Reforms Commission

to establish that the Petitioner has paid a certain amount of money for the purpose of purchasing

the said land.

The Petitioner as further established that he has obtained electricity supply by producing the

documents marked and annexed to the Petition as P6(g)(i) to P6(g)(ii).

Furthermore, the Petitioner has annexed two documents where the Divisional Secretary has

certified stating that the Petitioner is residing at the address given in the caption; the said

documents are marked and annexed to the Petition as P6(h)(i) and P6(h)(ii). The document marked

as P6(i) is the Petitioner’s driving license, further affirming that he resides in the given address.

With those documents, now the question arises whether it is proper for the Respondents to deny

the Petitioner the admission of his child on the basis that he has not established his residence at the

address given.

It is my view that though the Petitioner does not own the premises where he resides, he appears to

be a person who has been selected and allocated a land by the Land Reforms Commission which

8

the said parcel of land is to be transferred in the future; the Petitioner and the Land Reforms

Commission are also waiting to effect the transfer in the name of the Petitioner.

In addition to that, the said land where the Petitioner has established his residence, is a land that

appears to be vested with the Land Reforms Commission under the Land Reforms Commission

Law. And the Petitioner appears to be an employee in the estate that has been vested with the Land

Reforms Commission. Additionally, the said land appears to be allocated to the Petitioner on the

basis that the Petitioner is an employee on the said estate; therefore, the Petitioner appears to be

from the under-privileged community, mainly of Indian origin.

Except for the failure to establish his residence or that he owns the said residence permanently, all

other criteria required under the relevant rules marked as P4 annexed to the Petition, which the

Respondents have also admitted, have been satisfied by the Petitioner. However, the Petitioner has

been living in the said residence from 2005 as a registered voter, and prior to that he has been

living there, as a person who can become a voter only after he reaches the age of maturity.

Additionally, the land has been allocated by the Land Reforms Commission in favour of the

Petitioner pending the final transfer deeds. Therefore, the Petitioner has truly established that he

permanently resides at the address given which clearly falls within Clause 7.2.11 of P4(a).

What is important to be decided under the CO category is whether a person is permanently residing

at the address given. To establish this, deeds and other documents are important. Therefore, when

an interpretation is given, the purpose of the entire circular has to be considered rather than

selectively. Thus, in considering the Petitioner’s Application, all documents referred to above

should be considered as part and parcel of the application which support the Petitioner’s child’s

admission.

9

As such, it is my view that the denial of such right on the basis of failure to establish permanent

residence is irrational, illegal, and against the evidence placed for the principal and the Members

of the Board of Appeal. Thus, it is my view, the Petitioner, being a member of the under-privileged

community, should be accorded an opportunity to admit his son to the respected school which is

supposed to be one of the first Christian schools to be established in the whole of South Asia.

The free education system of this country was introduced by the late Mr. C.W.W. Kannangara.

Coincidentally, the late Mr. Kannangara had been a student of the very same school, Richmond

College of Galle. He initially happened to be in a Wesleyan school of Balapitiya, where Rev. J.H.

Darrel, the rector father (the principal) of Richmond College had participated as a chief guest to

distribute awards; it was the young Kannangara who bagged the most awards for his academic

achievements. Thus, the young Kannangara was given a scholarship to come to Richmond College,

free of charge of school fees; and who ended up as a lawyer later in life and then joined politics

and served the nation by introducing the free education system.

Ironically, most of these officers who are beneficiaries of this free education, have denied these

boys in both of these Applications, coming from apparently under-privileged backgrounds, such

an opportunity to join Richmond College as students to embark upon an academic career to

possibly achieve great heights and save the nation.

10

Conclusion

For the reasons adumbrated above, it is my view that a Writ of Certiorari and Writ of Mandamus

lie as prayed for in prayers (b) and (c) of the Petition, without cost.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL