IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for mandates in the

nature of Writ of Certiorari under and in terms of the

provisions of Article 140 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

1. V. Kalyanasundaram

The President,

Ampara District Tamil Maha Sangam,

No. 441, Pansala Lane, Akkaraipattu.

2. Nadaraja Haran

The Secretary,

Case No. C. A. (Writ) Application 611/2011 Vs.

Ampara District Tamil Maha Sangam,

No. 441, Pansala Lane, Akkaraipattu.

1. A. l. M. Athavullah

Petitioners

Minister of Local Government and Provincial

Councils,

Ministry of Local Government and Provincial

Councils, Battaramulla.

lB. Faizer Musthapa,

Minister of Local Government and Provincial

Councils, Ministry of Local Government and

Provincial Councils, Union Place, Colombo 2.

2. The Akkaraipattu Pradeshiya Sabha,

Akkaraipattu.

3. The Aliyaaddivembu Pradeshiya Sabha,

Aliyaaddivembu.

4. The Akkaraipattu Municipal Council,

Akkaraipattu.

Page 10f6

Before: Janak De Silva J.

Counsel:

5. Zaki Athaulla

The Mayor,

The Akkaraipattu Municipal Council,

Akkaraipattu.

5B. Athaulla Sakeel,

The Mayor,

The Akkaraipattu Municipal Council,

Akkaraipattu.

6. The District Secretary

District Secretariat, Ampara.

7. The Surveyor General

Surveyor General's Department, Colombo 05.

Respondents

J.e. Weliamuna P.e. with Kaushali Samarathunga for the Petitioners

Maithree Amerasinghe SC for lB, 6th and 7th Respondents

Written Submissions tendered on:

Petitioner on 26.10.2018

lB, 6th and 7th Respondents on 19.09.2018

Decided on: 02.03.2020

Janak De Silva J.

This application relates to the Gazette Notification marked 'P5(a)' in respect of the Administrative

boundaries of Akkaraipattu Pradeshiya Sabha, which has been amended by the Gazette

Notification marked 'P2(a)'. Accordingly, Aliyaadivembu Pradeshiya Sabha [Vide page SA of P2(a)]

and Karunkoditivu Pradeshiya Sabha [Vide page 6A of P2] were established.

Page 2 of6

Aliyaadivembu Pradeshiya Sabha consisted of the following Grama Niladhari Divisions;

"13-Pannakaadu; 21-Karunkoditivu No.7 (Part); 22-Karunkoditivu No. 8/9; 23-Kolavil"

Karunkoditivu Pradeshiya Sabha consisted ofthe following Divisions;

"lS-Karunkoditivu No.1; 16-17-Karunkoditivu No. 2/3; 18-19-Karunkoditivu No. 4/5; 20-

Karunkoditivu No.6; 21-Karunkoditivu No.7 (Part); 22-Karunkodivitu No.8 (Part)"

By way ofthe Gazette Notification marked 'P4' dated 17-03-1999, the name ofthe Karunkoditivu

Pradeshiya Sabha was changed to Akkaraipattu Pradeshiya Sabha.

Thereafter by way of Gazette Notification marked 'P5(a)' dated 06-01-2011, the Minister of Local

Authorities amended the land area of the Akkaraipattu Pradeshiya Sabha by replacing the

previous schedule, whereby, following Grama Niladhari Divisions were brought under

Akkaraipattu Pradeshiya Sabha -

"Paddiyadippitty - (AP/20/A); Pallik Kudyiruppu - 01- (AP/20/A/1); Pallik Kudyirupu - 02

- (AP/20/A/2); Isanganicheemai - (AP/20/A/3); Alim Nagar - (AP/20/A/4)"

The Minister (1st Respondent) further re-divided aforesaid 4 Grama Niladhari Divisions of the

Aliyaadivembu Pradeshiya Sabha into 22 Grama Niladhari Divisions. The Minister in his Statement

of Objections admitted that 4 Grama Niladhari Divisions were re-divided into 22 Divisions and

that it too was done under the patronage of Minister of Home Affairs and not by the 1"

Respondent [Vide paragraph 10 of the Statement of Objections of the 1st Respondent].

The Petitioners' assertion is that population, as transpires from the document marked P4(a) to

P4(b) could be seen on religious basis and in observing many of those Grama Niladhari Divisions,

they are primarily Hindu/Tamil Grama Niladhari Divisions.

By the Gazette Notification marked 'PSB', the Minister re-demarcated Akkaraipattu Pradeshiya

Sabha and by the same Gazette acting under sections 2, 3, 5 and 9 of the Municipal Councils

Ordinance, a new Municipal Council called 'Akkaraipattu Municipal Council' was formed [Vide

P5b].

The Petitioners' position is that this demarcation of boundaries has now made Tamils, who were

a majority, a minority in the previous known 'Aliyaadivembu Pradeshiya Sabha' (now

Akkaraipattu Pradeshiya Sabha) and this changed the ethnic composition of the Pradeshiya

Sabha.

The Respondents do not dispute the fact that the Petitioners or the people of the area were not

consulted prior to the purported re-demarcation.

Page 3 of 6

The issue that arises for determination in this application is whether the relevant Minister can

demarcate or re-demarcate boundaries of a Pradeshiya Sabha without consulting the people in

that area.

Section 9A (a) of the Pradeshiya Sabha Act No. 15 of 1987 as amended (Act) states that the

Minister may at any time by Order published in the Gazette vary the limits of any Pradeshiya

Sabha area, in a manner consistent with the provisions of section 2 of the Act.

Section 2(1) of the Act reads:

"The Minister may, with a view to facilitating the effective participation of the people in

local government and development functions, by Order published in the Gazette declare

any area to be a Pradeshiya Sabha area for the purposes of this Act and shall define the

administrative limits ofthe area so declared. The administrative limits of every Pradeshiya

Sabha area so declared shall, as far as possible, correspond to limits of an Assistant

Government Agent's division excluding any areas comprised in a Municipality or a town

(within the meaning of the Urban Councils Ordinance) which falls within the limits of such

Assistant Government Agent's division. The Minister may by the same Order or by a

subsequent Order, constitute a Pradeshiya Sabha for such Pradeshiya Sabha area and

assign a name to such Sabha." (Emphasis added)

The learned President's Counsel for the Petitioners relying on the italicized portion submitted

that there cannot be any facilitation of the effective participation of the people in local

government and development functions unless they are consulted before the demarcation or re-

demarcation of boundaries of a Pradeshiya Sabha. He relied on the decision of this Court in

Wickremasinghe and Another v. The Urban Development Authority [(2002) 3 SrLL.R. 243] where

it was held that rules of natural justice demand that there has to be a fair hearing before an

administrative authority acts or makes decisions affecting the rights of subjects.

However, in Bates v. Lard Hailsham [(1972) 3 All E.R. 1019] Megarry J. held as follows (at pages

1024-4):

"Let me accept that in the sphere of the so-called quasi-judicial the rules of natural justice

run, and that in the administrative or executive field there is a general duty of fairness.

Nevertheless, these considerations do not seem to me to affect the process of/egislation,

whether primary or delegated. Many of those affected by delegated legislation, and

affected very substantially, are never consulted in the process of enacting that legislation;

and yet they have no remedy." (Emphasis added)

Page 4 of6

We have some Acts which specifically require consultations before the Minister makes

regulations. Examples are Section 19(1) of the Atomic Energy Authority Act No. 19 of 1969,

Section 24(1) of the Electronics Transactions Act No. 19 of 2006, Section 40(1) of the National

Aquatic Resources Research and Development Agency Act No. 54 of 1981 and Section 30(1) of

the National Enterprise Development Authority Act No. 17 of 2006. All these provisions require

prior consultations with other bodies before the Minister makes any regulations.

In this regard I wish to advert to the English case of R (on the application of BAPID Action Ltd) v.

Secretary of State for the Home Deportment [2007] EWCA Civ 1139, paras 45-46] where Lord

Justice Hedley states as follows:

"45. The proposed duty is, as I have said, not unthinkable - indeed many people might

consider it very desirable - but thinking about it makes it rapidly plain that if it is to be

introduced it should be by Parliament and not by the courts. Parliament has the option,

which the courts do not have, of extending and configuring an abligation to consult

function by function. It can also abandon or modify obligations to consult which experience

shows to be unnecessary ar unworkable and extend those which seem to work well. The

courts, which act an larger principles, can do none of these things.

46. It is here, I think, that the respondents' conspectus of statutory provisions for

consultation is relevant and revealing. While it is not, for reasons I have given, an aid to

the construction of the Immigration Act 1971, it illustrates very clearly the need for

specificity in a requirement of consultation. The variety of statutary provisions, a list of

which is appended to this judgment, shows how the legislature will sometimes specify

whom it requires to be consulted; will sometimes prescribe consultation with those

members or representatives of a named class, or with those representative organisations,

who appear to the minister or body to be appropriate or (what is not the same thing) to

be representative; will sometimes dispense with the requirement in cases of urgency or

where the consultee agrees not to be consulted; will sometimes make consultation

discretionary; will sometimes make consultation obligatory but leave the choice of

consultees to the discretion of the minister or body concerned; will sometimes require

consultation with those appearing to the minister to represent interests substantially

affected or otherwise defined; and may combine consultation with specified bodies with

publication of a general invitation to make submissions. Two or more of these models may

be combined. In one remarkable instance (the Recorded Delivery Service Act 1962, s.

1(3)(4)), the Secretary of State is required, before exercising the power to amend a local

Page 5 of 6

or private Act, to consult with the promoter of the Bill which became the Act, or with

anyone considered by him to be a successor to the promoter's interest." (Emphasis added)

The proposition that rules of natural justice must be followed when exercising legislative power

is completely misconceived in law. There is no requirement for a hearing to be given to affected

parties prior to the exercise of legislative power, whether it is primary or delegated in nature

unless it is specifically required by law. However, neither Section 2 or 9A (a) of the Act requires

the relevant Minister to consult the people in the area before demarcating or re-demarcating

boundaries of a Pradeshiya Sabha.

For all the foregoing reasons, the application is dismissed without costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Page 6 of 6