==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA(PHC)0105/2018

Page 1 of 10

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under Article 154(P)(6)

of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka read with section 2(1)(b) of

the High Court of the Provinces (Special

Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 as amended.

Officer-In-Charge,

Police Station,

Tissamaharama.

Plaintiff

Vs

Sudantha Sanjeewa Ahangama,

No. 79, Dr. C.W.W. Kannangara Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

1st Party

And

Siththachcharige Sumith,

No.33, Sithujayapura, Kirinda,

Tissamaharama.

2nd Party

Court of Appeal Case No: CA(PHC) 0105/2018 HC Hambanthota Revision: 03/2015 MC Tissamaharama Case No:23376

CA(PHC)0105/2018

Page 2 of 10

Thusitha Srimal Hikkaduwa Liyanage,

Appearing by his Power of Attorney

Talpawila Vidana Kankanamge Munidasa,

Magama, Tissamaharama

Intervenient Party

AND NOW

Siththachcharige Sumith,

No.33, Sithujayapura, Kirinda,

Tissamaharama.

2nd Party-Petitioner

Thusitha Srimal Hikkaduwa Liyanage,

Appearing by his Power of Attorney

Talpawila Vidana Kankanamge Munidasa,

Magama, Tissamaharama

Intervenient Party-Petitioner

Vs

Sudantha Sanjeewa Ahangama,

No. 79, Dr. C.W.W. Kannangara Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

1st Party-Respondent

Officer-In-Charge,

Police Station,

Tissamaharama.

Plaintiff-Respondent

CA(PHC)0105/2018

Page 3 of 10

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Siththachcharige Sumith,

No.33, Sithujayapura, Kirinda,

Tissamaharama.

2nd Party-Petitioner-Appellant

2. Thusitha Srimal Hikkaduwa Liyanage,

Appearing by his Power of Attorney

Talpawila Vidana Kankanamge Munidasa,

Magama, Tissamaharama.

Intervenient Party-Petitioner-Appellant

Vs

1. Sudantha Sanjeewa Ahangama,

No. 79, Dr. C.W.W. Kannangara Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

1st Party-Respondent-Respondent

2. Officer-In-Charge,

Police Station,

Tissamaharama.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent

CA(PHC)0105/2018

Page 4 of 10

3. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo-12.

Respondent

Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J.

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Counsel : Neville Abeyratne, P.C. with Kaushalya

Abeyratne Dias and Shashika Dissanayake

instructed by Ajith Lal Kumara for the 02nd

Party-Petitioner-Appellant and Intervenient

Party-Petitioner-Appellant.

Manoj Bandara with Kasun Munasinghe

and Warangani Wickramarathne for the

01st Party-Respondent-Respondent.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent and the

Respondent are absent and unrepresented.

Written Submissions

of the 2nd Party Petitioner

-Appellant and

Intervenient Party-Petitioner

-Appellant

tendered on : 30.01.2026

Written Submissions

of the 1st Party

CA(PHC)0105/2018

Page 5 of 10

-Respondent-Respondent

tendered on : 02.02.2026

Written Submissions

of the Plaintiff-

-Respondent-Respondent

tendered on : Not tendered.

Written Submissions

of the Respondent

tendered on : Not tendered.

Decided on : 20.02.2026

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

When this matter came on before us for hearing on 10.12.2025, learned Counsel

for the 1st Party-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter called and referred to as

‘1st Party-Respondent’) raised a preliminary objection as to the maintainability of

the instant appeal for want of compliance of Rule 4(2) of the Court of Appeal

(Procedure for Appeals from High Courts) Rules 1988 in that it was contended

that compliance of Rule 4(2) of the Court of Appeal (Procedure for Appeals from

High Courts) Rules 1988 is mandatory and therefore, non-compliance thereof, is

fatal to the maintainability of the instant appeal and therefore, it should be

rejected.

It is to be observed that learned Counsel for the 1st Party Respondent clearly,

and unequivocally, admitted in Court that he had not taken up this preliminary

objection as to the maintainability of the instant appeal even in his written

submissions and thus, raised for the first time at the hearing of this appeal

before us on the day of 10.12.2025. Hence, it clearly, appears that the

CA(PHC)0105/2018

Page 6 of 10

preliminary objection so raised, by the learned Counsel for the 1st Party

Respondent as to the maintainability of the instant appeal, is very much belated.

It is in this context, I would think it most important and expedient to examine

section 39 of the Judicature Act which enacts thus;

“39. Whenever any defendant or accused party shall have pleaded in any

action, proceeding or matter brought in any Court of First Instance neither

party shall afterwards be entitled to object to the jurisdiction of such court,

but such court shall be taken and held to have jurisdiction over such

action, proceeding or matter:

Provided that where it shall appear in the course of the proceedings that

the action, proceeding or matter was brought in a court having no

jurisdiction intentionally and with previous knowledge of the want of

jurisdiction of such court, the Judge shall be entitled at his discretion to

refuse to proceed further with the same, and to declare the proceedings

null and void.”

Let me now, examine the applicability of the provision contained in section 39 of

the Judicature Act to the preliminary objection so raised, by the learned Counsel

for the 1st Party Respondent as to the maintainability of the instant appeal, for;

it was admittedly, raised by the learned Counsel for the 1st Party Respondent

very much belatedly.

Careful perusal of the record shows that the instant appeal had been referred to

this Court by the 2nd Party-Petitioner Appellant and the Intervenient Party-

Petitioner-Appellant (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘2nd Party Appellant

and the Intervenient Party Appellant’ respectively.) on 10.07.2018 and the brief

was obtained by the 1st Party Respondent on 11.11.2021 and proxy for the 1st

Party Respondent had been filed before this Court on 25.11.2021 and the appeal

had afterwards, been fixed for argument for the first time on 29.11.2021.

CA(PHC)0105/2018

Page 7 of 10

However, argument had afterwards been postponed for a very significant number

of occasions until on 10.12.2025 the day on which the preliminary objection was

raised by the learned Counsel for the 1st Party Respondent. In the meantime

written submissions too were filed in Court on behalf of the Appellants and the

1st Party Respondent.

The sequence of events occurred in the instant appeal, as enumerated above,

clearly, and unequivocally, shows that the 1st Party Respondent had submitted

himself to the jurisdiction of this Court at least, since 11.11.2021-the day on

which the brief had been collected by him from this Court and thereafter, he had

further submitted himself to the jurisdiction of this Court by filing a proxy on

his behalf on 25.11.2021 and also by furnishing to this Court the written

submissions and also being in this case as the 1st Party Respondent at least,

since 11.11.2021 up until now. Hence, the preliminary objection had been raised

by the 1st Party Respondent very much belatedly, namely; at least 7 years since

the institution of the instant appeal before this Court by the Appellants in the

year 2018 which clearly, shows that the 1st Party Respondent had thereby,

submitted himself to the jurisdiction of this Court without any objection being

raised to the alleged non-compliance of Rule 4(2) of the Court of Appeal

(Procedure for Appeals from High Courts) Rules 1988.

Hence, the 1st Party Respondent had pleaded in the instant appeal brought

before this Court by the Appellants and he is afterwards, not entitled to object to

the jurisdiction of this Court but this Court shall be taken and held to have

jurisdiction of this appeal in the light of section 38 of the Judicature Act.

I would therefore, hold that the preliminary objection so raised by the learned

Counsel for the 1st Party Respondent as to the maintainability of the instant

appeal cannot sustain in law and as such it should be rejected on this ground

alone.

CA(PHC)0105/2018

Page 8 of 10

Let me next, examine the pivotal basis upon which the preliminary objection was

premised and it is Rule 4(2) of the Court of Appeal (Procedure for Appeals from

High Courts) Rules 1988 which enacts thus;

“Where the appeal is on a matter of law the petition shall contain a

statement of the matter of law to be argued and shall bear a certificate by

an Attorney-At-Law that such matter of law is a fit question for

adjudication by the Court of Appeal.”

In the light of the judicial precedent referred to us by both the 1st Party

Respondent as well as the Appellants in their written submissions, it is well

established principle of law that compliance of rules are mandatory and non-

compliance is fatal in case no explanation therefor is forthcoming.

Upon a careful perusal of the petition of appeal, the non-compliance of Rule 4(2)

of the Court of Appeal (Procedure for Appeals from High Courts) Rules 1988, is

manifest in view of the absence of a statement of the matter of law to be argued

and also in view of the absence of a certification by an Attorney-At-Law that such

matter of law is a fit question for adjudication by the Court of Appeal.

However, upon a careful consideration of the grounds of appeal urged by the

Appellants in paragraph 8 (i) to (xxvi) of the petition of appeal in its totality, it

becomes manifest that the Appellants had thereby, clearly and in an

unambiguous manner set out the matters of law to be argued before this Court

even though there is a total absence of a certification by an Attorney-At-Law that

such matter of law is a fit question for adjudication by the Court of Appeal as

required by Rule 4(2) of the Court of Appeal (Procedure for Appeals from High

Courts) Rules 1988.

Now, the object to be achieved by promulgation of Rule 4(2) of the Court of Appeal

(Procedure for Appeals from High Courts) Rules 1988 is to prevent frivolous

CA(PHC)0105/2018

Page 9 of 10

appeals being lodged by an Attorney-at-Law who thereby, pledges his

professional reputation to the proprietary of the appeal.

Besides, the learned Counsel for the 1st Party Respondent does not allege that

the non-compliance of Rule 4(2) of the Court of Appeal (Procedure for Appeals

from High Courts) Rules 1988 had caused any prejudice to the 1st Party

Respondent.

Hence, the fact that upon a careful consideration of the grounds of appeal urged

by the Appellants in paragraph 8 (i) to (xxvi) of the petition of appeal in its totality,

it becomes manifest that the Appellants had thereby, clearly and in an

unambiguous manner set out the matters of law to be argued before this Court

even though there is a total absence of a certification by an Attorney-At-Law that

such matter of law is a fit question for adjudication by the Court of Appeal as

required by Rule 4(2) of the Court of Appeal (Procedure for Appeals from High

Courts) Rules 1988 and the fact that the learned Counsel for the 1st Party

Respondent does not allege that the non-compliance of Rule 4(2) of the Court of

Appeal (Procedure for Appeals from High Courts) Rules 1988 had caused any

prejudice to the 1st Party Respondent would in my opinion, amount to sufficient

compliance of Rule 4(2) of the Court of Appeal (Procedure for Appeals from High

Courts) Rules 1988 by the Appellants.

Hence, we would proceed to exercise the discretion vested in us in favour of the

Appellants. However, it is to be emphasized that this should not be construed as

a judicial pronouncement endorsing the non-compliance of Rule 4(2) of the Court

of Appeal (Procedure for Appeals from High Courts) Rules 1988 for; whether

Rules are complied or not, is a matter that should be decided by Court taking

into its consideration all the surrounding facts and circumstances of a given case

and therefore, thumb rule therefor cannot be laid down.

I would therefore, proceed to overrule the preliminary objection so raised by the

learned Counsel for the 1st Party Respondent very much belatedly, before us as

CA(PHC)0105/2018

Page 10 of 10

to the maintainability of the appeal for non-compliance of Rule 4(2) of the Court

of Appeal (Procedure for Appeals from High Courts) Rules 1988.

Registrar of this Court is directed to list this appeal for argument in due course.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL