==== BLOCKS ==== 

WRT/0990/2025

Page 1 of 24

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application under and in

terms of Article 140 of the Constitution for

mandates in the nature of Writs of Certiorari,

Prohibition and Mandamus.

Herath Abeykoon Bandaralage Sanjeewa

Nanda Udugama,

No. 48/9,

Borella Road,

Depanama, Pannipitiya.

Petitioner

Vs

1. Elkaduwa Plantations Ltd,

‘Janawathu Piyasa’,

No. 320,

T.B. Jaya Mawatha, Colombo 10.

and

Ratwatta,

Ukuwela, Matale.

2. Niroshan Karunarathne,

Chairman / Managing Director

Elkaduwa Plantations Ltd,

Court of Appeal Case No: WRT/0990/2025

WRT/0990/2025

Page 2 of 24

Janawathu Piyasa,

No. 320,

T.B. Jaya Mawatha, Colombo 10.

3. T. A. D. D. Premarathne,

Director 4. R. A. R. S. Mayadunna,

Director 5. B. M. D. K. Bandaranayaka,

Director 6. K. P. Weerasooriya,

Director 7. M. Pragnarathna,

Director 8. A. C. Kalyanakumar,

Director 3rd to 8th Respondents are members of the

Board of Directors of;

Elkaduwa Plantations Ltd,

‘Janawathu Piyasa'

No. 820,

T.B. Jaya Mawatha, Colombo 10.

9. Prabath Chandrakeerthi,

Secretary

Ministry of Plantation and Community

Infrastructure, 11th Floor, Sethsiripaya 2nd

Stage, Battaramulla.

WRT/0990/2025

Page 3 of 24

10. K. V. Samantha Viddyarathna, MP

Minister of Plantation and Community

Infrastructure

Ministry of Plantation and Community

Infrastructure, 11th Floor,

Sethsiripaya 2nd Stage,

Battaramulla.

11. H. M. S. B. Narampanawa,

Manager-Human Resources,

Elkaduwa Plantations Ltd

‘Janawathu Piyasa’,

No. 320,

T.B. Jaya Mawatha, Colombo 10.

12. Hon. Attorney-General,

Attorney-General's Department,

Hulftsdorp, Colombo 12.

Respondents

Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J.

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Counsel : Nisala Seniya Fernando instructed by

Thushari Jayawardana for the Petitioner.

WRT/0990/2025

Page 4 of 24

Prabashini Jayasekara, S.C., for the

Respondents.

Supported on : 25.11.2025

Written Submissions

of the Petitioner

tendered on : 18.12.2025

Written Submissions

of the Respondents

tendered on : 12.02.2026.

Decided on : 27.02.2026.

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

The Petitioner in the instant application seeks inter-alia, a mandate in the nature

of a writ of certiorari to quash the decision taken to interdict him without pay as

contained in the letter dated 08.09.2025 issued by the 2nd Respondent marked

‘P11’; a mandate in the nature of a writ of certiorari to quash the decisions

contained in the letter dated 08.09.2025 issued by the 2nd Respondent marked

‘P11’; a mandate in the nature of a writ of certiorari to quash the decisions of the

Board of Directors of the 1st Respondent taken at the meeting bearing No. 336

held on 29.08.2025 communicated by the letter dated 08.09.2025 marked ‘P11’;

a mandate in the nature of a writ of certiorari to quash the decision contained in

the letter dated 01.09.2025 issued by the 2nd Respondent marked ‘P10’; a

mandate in the nature of a writ of prohibition preventing the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th

, 6th , 7th , 8th , 9th, 10th, and/or 11th Respondents and/or any one or more of

them and/or their servants and agents, and/or their successors in office from

taking any steps to charge the Petitioner and/or conduct a disciplinary inquiry

WRT/0990/2025

Page 5 of 24

against the Petitioner based on the decision of the Board of Directors of the 1st

Respondent taken at the Board Meeting No: 336 dated 29.8.2025 and/or the

report of the audit conducted by the Auditor General’s Office during the month

of May 2025; a mandate in the nature of a writ of mandamus directing the 1st,

2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th, and/or 11th Respondents and/or any one

or more of them and/or their servants and agents, and/or their successors in

office to pay the salary and emoluments of the Petitioner; a mandate in the

nature of a writ of mandamus directing the 1st , 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th , 8th , 9th,

10th and/or 11th Respondents and/or any one or more of them and/or their

servants and agents, and/or their successors in office to pay the Petitioner

backwages and emoluments the Petitioner is lawfully entitled to; and an array of

interim orders as prayed for in prayer ‘k’ to ‘o’ of his petition dated 08.10.2025.

When this matter came on before us for support of the application for notice as

well as the application for interim orders, learned State Counsel raised a

preliminary legal objection as to the maintainability of the instant application on

the premise that the decision taken to interdict the Petitioner without pay as

contained in the letter dated 08.09.2025 issued by the 2nd Respondent marked

‘P11’ had been made by the Respondents in the exercise of the powers derived

upon them by the contract of employment between the Petitioner and the 1st

Respondent (P2) and not in the exercise of any statutory powers and therefore,

the decision sought to be impugned by the Petitioner in the instant application

(P11) is not amenable to writ jurisdiction but to the private law and therefore,

the instant application should be dismissed in-limine.

We heard the learned Counsel for the Petitioner in support of both the

application for notice of the instant application as well as the application for

interim relief. We also, heard the learned State Counsel for the Respondents in

opposition to the application for notice as well as the interim relief and also in

support of the preliminary legal objection so raised by him as to the

WRT/0990/2025

Page 6 of 24

maintainability of the instant application. Hence, this matter comes up before

us today for order thereon.

It would I think, be appropriate in the first instance, to deal with the preliminary

legal objection so raised to Court by the learned State Counsel for the

Respondents as to the maintainability of the instant application as enumerated

above.

It may now, be examined.

In view of the preliminary objection so raised, the pivotal question that would

first, arise for our consideration at this juncture is, as to whether the decision

taken to interdict the Petitioner without pay as contained in the letter dated

08.09.2025 issued by the 2nd Respondent marked ‘P11’ had been made by the

Respondents in the exercise of any statutory powers derived upon them by any

statute; and if so, whether the decision impugned (P11) is amendable to the writ

jurisdiction of this Court as contended by the Petitioner, or; as to whether the

decision impugned (P11) had been made by the Respondents in the exercise of

the powers derived upon them by the contract of employment between the

Petitioner and the 1st Respondent (P2) and not in the exercise of any statutory

powers so derived upon them; and if so, whether the decision impugned (P11)

is amenable to the remedy under private law and not the remedy under public

law by way of mandates in the nature of writs as prayed for by the Petitioner; as

contended by the learned State Counsel for the Respondents.

It is in this context, let me now, precisely, ascertain what the Petitioner seeks to

impugn in the instant application?

As is discernible from a careful scrutiny of the averments contained in the

petition filed before this Court by the Petitioner, the documents annexed thereto,

and the submissions oral and written made by the learned Counsel for the

Petitioner before us in support of the application for notice of the instant

application and the interim orders, it is the decision taken by the Respondents

WRT/0990/2025

Page 7 of 24

to interdict the Petitioner without pay (P11) which the Petitioner now, seeks to

impugn in the instant application before us.

The question that would next, arise for our consideration is the pivotal basis

upon which the Petitioner seeks to impugn the decision(P11) before us?

As can be deducible from a careful scrutiny of the averments contained in the

petition filed before this Court by the Petitioner, the documents annexed thereto,

and the submissions oral and written made by the learned Counsel for the

Petitioner before us in support of the application for notice of the instant

application and the interim orders, the pivotal basis therefor being the alleged

unreasonable and irrational conduct of the Respondents to interdict the

Petitioner without pay, as communicated by letter dated 8.9.2025 (P11)

without any preliminary investigation/inquiry being held, and/or without

offering the Petitioner the opportunity to provide any explanation/show

cause which according to the Petitioner, is a clear breach of the

Establishment Code and rules of Natural Justice. [Emphasis is mine]

It was averred by the Petitioner in the averments in paragraph 4 (a) of the petition

that the 1st Respondent is a limited liability company incorporated on 23.7.1993

under the Companies Act No. 17 of 1982 as a fully government-owned company

and re-registered under the Companies Act No.7 of 2007 as a publicly owned

enterprise with state ownership, managing ten (10) Estates and that the 1st

Respondent was established by vesting lands managed by the State Plantations

Corporations in terms of the provisions of the Conversion of Corporations and

Government Owned Businesses Undertakings into Public Companies Act No. 23

of 1987 under the State Privatisation Policy and that the 1st Respondent operates

as a single shareholder company, with the Secretary to the Treasury being the

Golden Shareholder and that the notice in respect of the formation of the 1st

Respondent was published in the Extraordinary Gazette Notification No. 776/13

of July 1993 and that the State exercises all pervasive control over the 1st

WRT/0990/2025

Page 8 of 24

Respondent, and in view of the aforesaid, the Petitioner states that it is trite that

the 1st Respondent is an instrumentality of the State.

It is to be observed that, the Respondent in the submissions-oral or written, had

not in any manner, sought to deny or refute the assertion of the Petitioner that

the 1st Respondent is a State Agency.

A copy of the Board Resolution passed by the Board of Directors of Elkaduwa

Plantations Ltd, at the Board meeting of the Directors held on 29th August 2025

which was certified by the 1st Respondent as a true copy, had been tendered to

this Court by the Respondents by the motion dated 12.02.2026 with a copy to

the Petitioner. Hence, the Petitioner has been made fully, aware of the Board

Resolution and its contents thereby, giving him reasonable opportunity to

comment thereon, nevertheless, the Petitioner opted to remain silent without

making any comment on it. This Court is thus, entitled to consider the Board

Resolution and the contents therein by reason of the fact that a copy of the same

had duly, been tendered by the Respondents to the Petitioner in terms of the

motion filed before this Court by them on 12.02.2026

It is to be observed that it is this Board Resolution in which the decision taken

to interdict the Petitioner without pay as contained in the letter dated 08.09.2025

issued by the 2nd Respondent (P11), is contained.

It clearly, appears upon a careful perusal of the Board Resolution and the letter

of interdiction (P11) that the Auditor General is responsible for auditing the 1st

Respondent which clearly, and unequivocally, shows that the 1st Respondent is

a State Agency.

It is to be observed that, in terms of the letter of interdiction (P11), interdiction

of the Petitioner from his employment by the Respondents was based on the

decision made by the Board of Directors at the Board meeting No. 336 held on

29.08.2025 and as per Clause No. 31:1:7 of Chapter XLVIII of the Establishment

Code.

WRT/0990/2025

Page 9 of 24

It was specifically resolved in the resolution by the Board of Directors of the 1st

Respondent that decisions pertaining to the disciplinary action are to be made

as per the Establishment Code since it was the procedure which was adhered to

by the 1st Respondent previously, and therefore, it was resolved by the Board of

Directors of the 1st Respondent to withdraw the two labour allowances granted

to the Petitioner and to interdict him immediately, as per Clause No. 31:1:7 of

Chapter XLVIII of the Establishment Code.

Besides, the contract of employment (P2) does not contain any provision with

regard to the interdiction of the Petitioner from his employment.

One of the principal contentions so advanced by the Petitioner in the instant

application is that the Respondents have acted in violation of the provisions of

the Establishment Code (hereinafter called and referred to as the ‘E-Code’)in that

it was contended that the Respondents had failed to adhere to the procedure laid

down in the E-Code when they had proceeded to make the decision to interdict

him without pay as contained in (P11).

It clearly, and unequivocally, manifest from the Board Resolution passed by the

Board of Directors of Elkaduwa Plantations Ltd at the Board Meeting of the

Directors held on 29th August 2025 and the letter of interdiction (P11) that the

procedure laid down in the E-Code relating to the disciplinary action of its

employees had previously, been adhered to and adopted by the 1st Respondent.

It was held by the Supreme Court in Elmore Perera Vs. Major Montagu

Jayawickrema, Minister of Public Administration and Plantation Industries

and Others 1985 [1] SLR 285 at Page 335 that,

“The Establishments Code is the basic document relating to procedures of

disciplinary action against public officers. It has been formulated by the

Cabinet of Ministers under Article 55 (4) of the Constitution in whom such

a power is reposed. This formulation has the characteristics of a policy

decision as it deals with the broad principles and procedures governing

WRT/0990/2025

Page 10 of 24

disciplinary action against officers of practically the entire public service

in this country………..The administration of the public service is now an

internal matter of the Executive. It would however appear that the Cabinet,

after due deliberation, has sought to formulate a Code of regulations

containing fair procedures and safeguards balancing the requirements

and interests of the Government with the rights of public officers, and the

legal protection now provided by the law to public officers is contained in

this Code. These procedures are therefore mandatory and cannot be

superseded or disregarded without due legal authority.”

In the light of the facts and the law enumerated above, I would hold that the

interdiction of the Petitioner is governed by the procedure laid down by the E-

Code and therefore, this Court needs to examine whether the Respondents have

violated any statutory provisions contained in the E-Code when the Respondents

had issued the disciplinary order (P11) in the absence of provisions in the

contract of employment (P2) relating to interdiction of the Petitioner from his

employment.

I would therefore, hold that the preliminary legal objection raised by the learned

State Counsel for the Respondents as to the maintainability of the instant

application is not entitled to succeed both in fact and law and as such it should

be over-ruled in-limine.

The only question that remains for our consideration is; Whether the

Respondents had acted in violation of the E-Code when they took the decision to

interdict the Petitioner without pay as contained in the letter dated 08.09.2025

issued by the 2nd Respondent (P11) without any preliminary

investigation/inquiry being held, and/or without offering the Petitioner the

opportunity to provide any explanation/show cause which according to the

Petitioner, is a clear breach of the Establishment Code and rules of Natural

Justice; and if so whether the decision contained in ‘P11’ is arbitrary,

unlawful, malicious, unreasonable, irrational, disproportionate and illegal

WRT/0990/2025

Page 11 of 24

and therefore, liable to be quashed by a mandate in the nature of a writ of

certiorari as alleged by the Petitioner [Emphasis is mine]

At this juncture, let me briefly, set out the facts pertaining to the instant

application as averred in the petition by the Petitioner.

The Petitioner who began his career as Assistant-Superintendent of the 1st

Respondent had subsequently, been promoted to the post of Superintendent of

the 1st Respondent; and that he had subsequently, been transferred to the head

office of the 1st Respondent as Marketing Manager of the 1st Respondent with

effect from 01.02.2019 and served in that capacity until he had been interdicted

as per the letter of interdiction (P11) with immediate effect, namely; 08.09.2025

on the allegation that as per the audit conducted during the month of May, 2025

by the Auditor General’s Office, it had been observed that though he was not

allocated with a estate bungalow, he had misused the public funds of Rs.

4,739,947/- as a claim of labour allowances from 01.02.2019 to 28.03.2025;

and that further, 1st Respondent had paid a total of Rs. 610,725/- from

February, 2019 to March, 2025 as EPF to two labourers which the Petitioner had

been claiming allowances for, and therefore, it is not recoverable at any cost to

1st Respondent by which the Petitioner had created a huge loss as a responsible

officer who is working in a government institute.

It is in this view of the matter, let me now, examine the provisions of the E- code

relevant to the issue at hand before us.

Clause 13:1 of the Chapter XLVIII-Volume 2 of the E-Code provides for the

preliminary investigation and it enacts thus; “A preliminary investigation is that

which is conducted by a Disciplinary Authority or Head of Institution or other

Appropriate Authority or by an officer or a Committee of Officers duly authorized

by the above authorities to find facts as are necessary to ascertain the truth of a

suspicion or information that an act of misconduct has been committed by an

officer or several officers, and to find out and report whether there are, prima-

facie, sufficient material and evidence to prefer charges and take disciplinary

WRT/0990/2025

Page 12 of 24

action against the officer or officers under suspicion. The primary task of an

officer or a Committee of Officers conducting a preliminary investigation is the

recording of statements of relevant persons, examination of documents and

records, obtaining of originals or certified copies thereof, physical verification of

state-owned assets in the charge of the officer or officers subject to the

investigation, examination of relevant premises, taking over of all articles and

documents which are considered necessary and making their observations and

recommendations on matters found out by them regarding the act of misconduct

committed.”

Clause 31:4 of the Chapter XLVIII-Volume 2 of the E-Code enacts the general

rule that normally a public officer should be interdicted on matters

disclosed in a preliminary investigation held into the charges against him.

On the other hand, Clause 31:5 of the Chapter XLVIII-Volume 2 of the E-Code,

enacts three exceptions to the general rule laid down in Clause 31:4 thereof,

as follows;

31:5 In such instances as given below, a relevant authority may interdict a public

officer even without holding a preliminary investigation as referred to in sub-

section 31:4 above.

31:5:1 Where it is evident to the relevant authority that the continuance of the

officer in service is detrimental to the holding of a preliminary investigation

against him.

31:5:2 Where the first information itself on the suspected acts of misconduct

committed by the officer is sufficient to establish the relevant matters.

31:5:3 Where Court proceedings have been initiated against a public officer in

terms of section 27 of this Code.

Hence, it clearly, appears that the general rule laid down by clause 31:4 of the

Chapter XLVIII-Volume 2 of the E-Code is not in any manner, absolute but it is

always subject to three exceptions laid down by Clauses 31:5:1, 31:5:2 and

WRT/0990/2025

Page 13 of 24

31:5:3 thereof, and in such instances, the relevant disciplinary authority may,

interdict the officer concerned without holding a preliminary inquiry however,

subject to the Clause 31:6 thereof.

Clause 31 of the Chapter XLVIII-Volume 2 of the E-Code provides for the

interdiction and compulsory leave wherein it sets out a number of instances

where the relevant Disciplinary Authority, or the relevant Secretary to the

Ministry or Head of Department not holding disciplinary authority, may

forthwith interdict the officer concerned subject to the covering approval of the

Disciplinary Authority., and it enacts thus;

“Where it is disclosed, prima facie, that a public officer has committed either

one or some or all of the following acts of misconduct, the relevant

Disciplinary Authority, or the relevant Secretary to the Ministry or Head of

Department not holding disciplinary authority, may forthwith interdict the

officer concerned subject to the covering approval of the Disciplinary Authority.

However as soon as the letter of interdiction is issued by the Disciplinary

Authority should be informed sending also a copy of such letter to the purpose

of obtaining covering approval.

31:1:1 Non-allegiance to the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka.

31:1:2 Act or cause to act in such manner as to bring the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka into disrepute.

31:1:3 Being prosecuted in a Court of Law on anti-government, terrorist or

criminal charges.

31:1:4 Being prosecuted in a Court of Law on bribery or corruption charges.

31:1:5 Being drunk or smelling of liquor within duty hours or within Government

premises.

WRT/0990/2025

Page 14 of 24

31:1:6 Use or be in possession of narcotic drugs within duty hours or within

Government premises.

31:1:7 Misappropriate or cause another to misappropriate government

funds.

31:1:8 Misappropriate government resources or cause such misappropriation, or

cause destruction or depreciation of government resources wilfully or

negligently.

31:1:9 Act or cause to act negligently or inadvertently or willfully in such manner

as to harm government interests.

31:1:10 Act in such manner as to bring the public service into disrepute.”

[Emphasis is mine]

Clause 31:6 of the Chapter XLVIII-Volume 2 of the E-Code provides that “Even

in the case of an officer interdicted in terms of 31:5:1 and 31:5:2 above, a

preliminary investigation should be held, without delay, after interdiction.”

What does the word “forthwith” embodied in Clause 31:1 of the Chapter XLVIII-

Volume 2 of the E-Code mean? [Emphasis is mine]

It was held in Queen vs. The Justices of Berkshire [(1878-79) 4 Q.B.D. 469

(471)] that, “The question is substantially one of fact. It is impossible to lay down

any hard and fast rule as to what is the meaning of the word 'immediately', in all

cases. The words 'forthwith' and 'immediately' have the same meaning. They are

stronger than the expression 'within a reasonable time', and imply prompt,

vigorous action, without any delay, and whether there has been such action is

question of fact, having regard to the circumstances of the particular case”.

It was held in Soysa vs. Anglo-Ceylon and General Estates Co. 19 N. L. R.

374 that, “In my opinion the word "forthwith in the enactment in question should

WRT/0990/2025

Page 15 of 24

be construed as meaning, not within a period reasonable in the circumstances,

"but "without any delay that can possibly be avoided.”

Hence, it becomes abundantly, clear upon a careful analysis of Clauses 31:5:2

to 31:1 and 31:1:7 of the Chapter XLVIII-Volume 2 of the E-Code altogether that

when a public officer is interdicted before a preliminary investigation being held

not only the requirement in Clause 31:5:1 but also the instances embodied in

Clauses 31:5:2 and 31:5:3 may be considered by the disciplinary authority .

Accordingly, if the disciplinary authority is of the view that the first information

itself on the suspected acts of misconduct alleged to have been committed by the

public officer is sufficient to establish the relevant matters, then such officer can

be forthwith, interdicted even before a preliminary investigation being held

subject to the covering approval of the disciplinary authority in case of the Head

of the Department exercising the said power.

The pivotal contention advanced by the learned Counsel for the Petitioner in

support of the application for notice and the interim orders is that the

Respondents had acted in violation of the E-Code when they took the decision to

interdict the Petitioner without pay as contained in the letter dated 08.09.2025

issued by the 2nd Respondent (P11) without any preliminary

investigation/inquiry being held, and/or without offering the Petitioner the

opportunity to provide any explanation/show cause which according to the

Petitioner, is a clear breach of the Establishment Code and rules of Natural

Justice and hence, the decision contained in ‘P11’ is arbitrary, unlawful,

malicious, unreasonable, irrational, disproportionate and illegal and

therefore, liable to be quashed by a mandate in the nature of a writ of

certiorari as alleged by the Petitioner [Emphasis is mine]

It may now, be examined.

Interdiction of the Petitioner from his employment had derived upon the letter of

interdiction (P11) issued to him by the 2nd Respondent and the material part

WRT/0990/2025

Page 16 of 24

thereof, which would be instrumental for the determination of the issue at hand,

may be reproduced verbatim the same as follows;

“We write to inform you that you that as per the recent audit conducted

during the month of May 2025, by the Auditor General's office it has been

observed that though you was not allocated with an estate bungalow, you

have misused the public funds of Rs. 4,739,947 as a claim of Labour

allowances from 01st February 2019 to 28th March 2025.

Further, Elkaduwa Plantations Ltd; (EPL) has paid a total of Rs. 610,725

from February 2019 to March 2025 as EPF to 02 labourers which you have

been claiming allowances for. Therefore, it is not recoverable at any cost

to EPL by which you have created a huge loss as a responsible Officer who

is working in a Government Institute.”

Upon a careful scrutiny of the material part of the letter of interdiction (P11), it

appears that the interdiction of the Petitioner from his employment was based

on an allegation of a serious nature, namely; that though the Petitioner was not

allocated with an estate bungalow, he had misused the public funds of Rs.

4,739,947 as a claim of Labour allowances from 01st February 2019 to 28th

March 2025; and that the 1st Respondent had paid a total of Rs. 610,725 from

February 2019 to March 2025 as EPF to 02 labourers which he had been

claiming allowances for, thus, it was not recoverable at any cost to 1st

Respondent by which he had created a huge loss as a responsible Officer who is

working in a Government Institute.

It is under those circumstances, the Respondent had made a decision to interdict

the Petitioner as per a decision made by the Board of Directors at the Board

meeting no:336 held on 29/08/2025 and as per the Establishment Code Chapter

XLVIII, Clause No: 31:1:7 from the Post of Marketing Manager with immediate

effect without pay, subject to the holding of a disciplinary inquiry on the above

matter immediately. It is this decision of the Respondents contained in (P11) that

WRT/0990/2025

Page 17 of 24

the Petitioner now, seeks to impugn before us in the instant application on the

basis as enumerated above.

In terms of the letter of interdiction (P11), the interdiction of the Petitioner from

his employment was solely, and entirely, based on an allegation of misusing

public funds amounting to Rs. 4,739,947/- as a claim of Labour allowances from

01st February 2019 to 28th March 2025 for which he was not entitled by reason

of the fact that he had not been allocated with an estate bungalow for his

occupation by the 1st Respondent; and in consequence, the 1st Respondent had

to pay a non-recoverable total sum of Rs. 610,725/- from February 2019 to

March 2025 as EPF to 02 labourers which he had been claiming allowances for

and by which, the Petitioner had created a huge loss as a responsible Officer who

is working in a Government Institute.

The pertinent question that would then arise for our consideration is; From

where did the Respondents get the first information of the misuse of such a

vast amount of public funds by the Petitioner amounting to Rs. 4,739,947/- for

the purposes of Clause 31:5:2 of Chapter XLVIII of the E-Code to be read with

Clause 31:1 and 31:1:7 thereof?[Emphasis is mine]

The letter of interdiction (P11) is self-explanatory on this pertinent question

wherein, it was stated that it was disclosed as per the recent audit conducted

during the month of May 2025, by the Auditor General's office. This had been

well, supported by the Audit Query directed to the 1st Respondent by the Auditor

General of this Country pursuant to an audit conducted by him on the 1st

Respondent during the period stipulated therein, apparently, by virtue of the

powers vested in him in terms of the provisions of the National Audit Act No. 19

of 2018, and the observations of the Auditor General contained therein would be

pertinent for the resolution of the issue at hand and they may be reproduced

verbatim the same in the language it was made as follows;

WRT/0990/2025

Page 18 of 24

“ඇල්කඩුව වැවිලි සමාගමේ ප්‍රධාන කාර්යාලර් ඇතුලුව වතු 10 හි සිදු කරන ලද නිර්ැදි විගණන

පරීක්ෂාමේද පහත සඳහන් කරුණ අනාවරණර් විර්

2.ඇල්කඩුව වැවිලි සමාගමමහි විධාර්ක බංගලා සඳහා අභ්‍යන්තර කේකරුවන් මදමදමනකුමේ

වැටුප් වාෂයික අර්වැර්ට ඇතුලත් කරනු ලබයි. ඒ අනුව බංගලාව හිමි නිලධාරිර්ා අභ්‍යන්තර

කේකරුවන් මසේවමේ මර්දවූමේ නේ එම කේකරුවන්මේ පැමිණීම ක්මෂේත්‍ර නිලධාරිර්ා විසින්

තහවුරු කර ගැනීමමන් අනතුරුව ක්මෂේත්‍ර තුණ්ඩඩුවට (Field Chit) හා මෙක්මරෝලර්ට (Check

roll) ඔවුන්මේ නම ඇතුලත් කර, මාසිකව වතු කාය මඟින් අදාල කේකරුවන්ට වැටුප්

මගවනු ලබයි. ඒ අනුව,

අ) (1) 2019 මපබරවාරි 01 දින සිට 2025 මාය 28 දින දක්වා සමාගමේ මසේවර් කරනු

ලබන අමලවි කළමනාකරු වන එසේ එන් උඩුගම මහතා හට පදිංචිර් සඳහා බංගලාවක් ලබා දී

මනාතිබුණද ඔහු විසින් අභ්‍යන්තර කේකරුවන් මදමදමනකු මසේවමේ මර්දවූ බවට සඳහන්

කරමින් ඉහත සඳහන් කාල පරිච්මේදර් සඳහා රු.4,739,947 ක කේකරු දීමනාවක් ලබාමගන

තිබුණු බව නිරීක්ෂණර් විර්. විසේතර ඇමුණුම 01 හි දැක්මේ.

(ii) එමමන්ම එසේ. එන්. උඩුගම මහතා විසින් අභ්‍යන්තර කේකරුවන් මදමදමනකු මසේවමේ මර්දවූ

බවට ක්මෂේත්‍ර නිලධාරීන්ද තහවුරු මනාකරන අතර, ඉහතකාල පරිච්මේදමේ කිසිදු දිනක උදෑසන

මපරට්ටටුව සඳහාද කේකරුවන් මදමදනා පැමිණ මනාතිබුණි.

(iii) තවද, 2019 මපබරවාරි මස සිට 2025 මාය මාසර් දක්වා නාලන්ද වතු අධිකාරීවරුන්

සාමානය මපරට්ටටු (General Muster) 12 ක් පවත්වා ඇති අතර, එම එකදු මපරට්ටටුවකට මහෝ

එසේ එන් උඩුගම මහතා විසින් කේකරු දීමනාව ලබා ගැනීම සඳහා නේ ඇතුලත් කළ කේකරුවන්

පැමිණ මනාතිබුණි.

(iv) එමමන්ම ඇල්කඩුව වැවිලි සමාගමේ සභ්‍ාපතිවරර්ා විසින් එසේ.එන් උඩුගම මහතා ඇමතූ

2029 ජනවාරි 10 දිනැති ලිපිර් මඟින් ඔහුට කේකරු දීමනාවක් අනුමත කළද, එනේ අමලවි

කළමනාකරු මලස මසේවා තත්ත්වර් මවනසේ කිරීමේදී, ඊට මපර පරිදි වතු අධිකාරී මලස

කේකරුවන් මදමදමනකු බංගලාමේ මසේවමේ මර්ාදවා එම කේකරුවන්ට මගවූ දීමනාව ඔහුමේ

බංගලාව සඳහාද ඉහත පරිදි ලබාගත හැකි බව සඳහන් වුවද, මපෞද්ගලික නිවසට මහෝ එසේ. එන්.

උඩුගම මහතාට කේකරු දීමනාවක් මුදලින් ලබාගත හැකි බව සඳහන් කර මනාමැති බව

නිරීක්ෂණර් මේ.

තු

තු

ර්ාලර්

WRT/0990/2025

Page 19 of 24

(v) තවද, එසේ.එන් උඩුගම මහතාට ඇල්කඩුව වැවිලි සමාගම විසින් බංගලාවක් සපර්ා

මනාතිබිර්දී, ඔහු විසින් 2019 මපබරවාරි මස සිට 2025 මාය මාසර් දක්වා කේකරුවන්

මදමදමනකුමේ නේ ඇතුලත් කර ලබාගත් කේකරු දීමනාව මවනුමවන් සමාගම විසින් රු.

488,580 ක මසේවක අර්යසාධක අරමුදල් දාර්කත්වර්ක් හා රු. 122,145 ක මසේවක භ්‍ාරකාර

අරමුදල් දාර්කත්වර්ක් දරා තිබූ අතර, එමඟින් රු. 610,725 ක අර්කරගත මනාහැකි අලාභ්‍ර්ක්

සමාගමට දැරීමට සිදුව ඇති බව නිරීක්ෂණර් විර්…..”

There is no reason to reject and/or disbelieve the observations so made by the

Auditor General that the Petitioner had misused the public funds to the value as

enumerated therein for; the observation was based upon an audit conducted by

him by virtue of the powers statutorily, vested in him as enumerated above, and

therefore, the said observations made by the Auditor General should be

construed as the first information on the alleged misuse of public funds by the

Petitioner for all purposes and intents of Clause 31:5:2 of Chapter XLVIII of the

E-Code.

The Observations so made by the Auditor General had been well, supported by

the contents of the letter referred to in paragraph 2(අ)(iv) of the Audit Query,

namely; the letter annexed to his petition of the Petitioner marked as ‘P9’ and

Clause 1 of P9 would be pertinent in this regard and it reads thus;

“You will be entitled for two (02) labour allowances in the usual manner

enjoyed by you presently, based on the audit requirements;” [Emphasis

is mine]

The question that would then, arise is; What does it mean by the phrase “two

(02) labour allowances in the usual manner enjoyed by you presently”?

[Emphasis is mine]

Clauses 8 and 9 of the letter of appointment/contract of employment (P2) would

be important in this regard and they read thus;

තු

WRT/0990/2025

Page 20 of 24

“08. QUARTERS : You will be provided with a bungalow free of rent on the

estate supplied with hard and soft furnishings as per Estate Inventory.

09. LABOUR ALLOWANCE: You will be entitled to one indoor and one

outdoor labourer. Such labourers shall be remunerated by the Elkaduwa

Plantations Limited through the Estate Checkroll.”

It would also be pertinent to examine Clause 1 of ‘P7’ which is the letter of

transfer dated 03.01.2019 by which the Petitioner was transferred to the head

office as the Marketing Manager and it reads thus;

“1) Labour allowances :-Since your working place is Head Office you will

not be entitled for an Official Bungalow and you will not be paid the normal

labour allowances.”

A careful reading of Clauses 8 and 9 of the letter of appointment/contract of

employment (P2) in conjunction with Clause 1 of ‘P7’, it becomes abundantly,

clear that the Petitioner is entitled to two labour allowances only where he is

provided with an official bungalow; and that he is not entitled to claim the two

labour allowances in cash nor is he entitled to claim labour allowances for his

private residence. It is this sense that the phrase “two (02) labour allowances in

the usual manner enjoyed by you presently” contained in ‘P9’ should be

construed and understood as observed by the Auditor General in the Audit Query

directed to the 1st Respondent as enumerated above. However, the Petitioner had

nevertheless, claimed two labour allowances in Cash for the period stipulated in

the letter of interdiction (P11) as enumerated above, notwithstanding the fact

that he had not been provided with an official bungalow for the said period.

[Emphasis is mine]

Hence, it prima facie appears that the first information itself namely; Audit Query

directed by the Auditor General to the 1st Respondent, on the suspected acts of

WRT/0990/2025

Page 21 of 24

misconduct alleged to have been committed by the Petitioner is sufficient to

establish the relevant matters.

Clause 31:11 and 31:11:2 of Chapter XLVIII of the E-Code enact thus;

“31:11 A public officer interdicted under the following circumstances

should not be paid any emoluments during the period of interdiction.

31:11:2 Where misappropriation of a serious nature of public funds and

property is committed or where they are caused to be destroyed or

depreciated by acts of commission or omission.”

Hence, the Respondents are entitled to interdict the Petitioner without pay acting

under the powers vested in them by Clause 31:5 Chapter XLVIII of the E-Code

to be read with Clauses 31:5:2, 31:1, 31:1:7, 31:11 and 31:11:2 thereof, and

therefore, the decision of the Respondents contained in ‘P11’ to interdict the

Petitioner without pay can sustain in law.

Besides, it clearly, appears from a careful reading of the resolution adopted by

the Board of Directors of the 1st Respondent that the Board of Directors had

proceeded to interdict the Petitioner without pay taking into consideration the

Audit Report as the preliminary investigation for all purposes and intents of the

said provisions of the E-Code.

Hence, it clearly, appears that the Respondents had interdicted the Petitioner

without pay on the alleged misuse of public funds to the value as enumerated

above, by virtue of the powers vested in them by Clauses 31:1, 31:1:7, 31:5 and

31:5:2 of Chapter XLVIII of the E-Code thereby, making the decision of the

Respondents to interdict the Petitioner without pay, intra-vires.

It is in this view of the matter, let me now, consider the principal ground upon

which the Petitioner seeks to impugn the decision contained in ‘P11’.

WRT/0990/2025

Page 22 of 24

The common law grounds of judicial review are illegality, irrationality and

procedural impropriety as held in Council of Civil Service Union v. Minister

for the Civil Service (1985) AC 374(HL). There, Lord Diplock went on to state

as follows;

"By "illegality" as a ground for judicial review I mean that the decision-maker

must understand correctly the law that regulates his decision-making power and

must give effect to it. Whether he has or not is par excellence a justiciable

question to be decided, in the event of dispute, by those persons, the judges, by

whom the judicial power of the state is exercisable.

In the instant application, the Respondents had having clearly, understood the

law that regulates its decision contained in ‘P11’ and given effect to it as

enumerated above. Hence, the decision contained in ‘P11’ is not in any manner,

illegal and therefore, intra-vires.

Lord Diplock in the case referred to above went on to state as follows;

“By "irrationality" I mean what can by now be succinctly referred to as

"Wednesbury unreasonableness" (Associated Provincial Picture Houses

Ltd. v. Wednesbury Corporation [1948] 1 KB 223). It applies to a decision

which is so outrageous in its defiance of logic or of accepted moral

standards that no sensible person who had applied his mind to the

question to be decided could have arrived at it. Whether a decision falls

within this category is a question that judges by their training and

experience should be well equipped to answer, or else there would be

something badly wrong with our judicial system. To justify the court's

exercise of this role, resort I think is today no longer needed to Viscount

Radcliffe's ingenious explanation in Edwards v. Bairstow [1956] AC 14 of

irrationality as a ground for a court's reversal of a decision by ascribing it

to an inferred though unidentifiable mistake of law by the decision-maker.

"Irrationality" by now can stand upon its own feet as an accepted ground

on which a decision may be attacked by judicial review.

WRT/0990/2025

Page 23 of 24

For the reasons set out above, the decision contained in ‘P11’ cannot in any

manner, be said to be irrational for; it is not so outrageous in its defiance of logic

nor of accepted moral standards that no sensible person who had applied his

mind to the question to be decided could have arrived at it.

Lord Diplock in the case referred to above, went on to state further as follows;

“I have described the third head as "procedural impropriety" rather than

failure to observe basic rules of natural justice or failure to act with

procedural fairness towards the person who will be affected by the

decision. This is because susceptibility to judicial review under this head

covers also failure by an administrative tribunal to observe procedural

rules that are expressly laid down in the legislative instrument by which

its jurisdiction is conferred, even where such failure does not involve any

denial of natural justice. But the instant case is not concerned with the

proceedings of an administrative tribunal at all.”

In view of the foregoing reasons, the decision of the Respondents to interdict the

Petitioner as contained in ‘P11’, cannot successfully, be attacked on the basis of

procedural impropriety for; the said decision had been arrived at by the

Respondents by adhering to the procedural rules laid down in the E-Code as

morefully, enumerated above.

Besides, it is to be observed, that the Petitioner still has ample opportunity to

challenge any decision of the Respondents after the investigations (including the

domestic inquiry) are over. The interdiction will not be a presumption of guilt

and it cannot be considered as a punishment. The interdiction is one of the

foremost processes used to initiate investigations in to allege misconducts.

For the reasons enumerated above, I would find myself unable to agree with the

contention advanced by the learned Counsel for the Petitioner that the decision

contained in ‘P11’, is arbitrary and/or unlawful and/or malicious and/or

irrational and/or disproportionate and/or illegal.

WRT/0990/2025

Page 24 of 24

In the light of the law and the facts enumerated above, I would hold that the

Petitioner has not made out a prima facie case for notice.

I would therefore, refuse to issue notices on the Respondents.

In the result, I would dismiss the instant application, however, without costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL