1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C. A. 401/95 (F)

D. C. Kaluthara, No. 5546/P

W. K. D Wijesinghe, Pinhena, Beruwala

PLAINTIFF VS K. K. D. Champa Samanmali Gunathilake, Pinhena, Beruwala And 3 others

DEFENDANTS AND NOW BETWEEN W. K. D. Wijesinghe Pinhena, Beruwala

PLAINTIFF-APPELLANT VS K. K. D. Champa Samanmali Gunathilake, Pinhena, Beruwala And 3 others

DEFENDANT-RESPONDENTS

2

BEFORE : M. M. A. GAFFOOR, J. COUNSEL : C. J. Ladduwahetti for the Plaintiff-Appellant Rohan Sahabandu PC for the 2nd Defendant-

Respondent WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS TENDERED ON : 30.08.2018 by the 2nd Defendant-Respondent 07.09.2018 by the Plaintiff-Appellant DECIDED ON : 10.01.2019

*****

M. M. A. GAFFOOR, J.

This is an appeal from the judgment of the learned District Judge of Kaluthara in

respect of a Partition action bearing Case No. 5546/P.

The Plaintiff-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant) by his amended

Plaint dated 20.02.1992 instituted this action seeking to partition the land situated

in Kaluthara District among the parties and also for a divided of title as 11th para

of the amended Plaint of an undivided portion of the specific land described in the

schedule to the amended Plaint.

The 2nd Defendant-Respondent asking a right of way to the 12 feet Road starting

from Gamsaba Road to Mahaliyangoda Rubber Estate according to the

Appellants Deed No. 13582 (marked as P11).

However, the Appellants main submission was that according to the Deed No.

13582, the Respondents are only entitled a strip of land 12 feet wide through any

area of the corpus and they cannot demand the said 12 feet road specifically

along the Northern Boundary of the Corpus.

It is the contention of the Appellant that he was willing to give Respondents the 12

feet strip land from any area of the corpus other than along the Northern Boundary

3

which the Respondents are entitled to by virtue of the above mentioned deeds. The

Appellant further stated that the Respondents are demanding this strip of land only

along the Northern Boundary of the corpus to maliciously deprive the Appellant of

a contiguous lot with the land on the other side of the corpus which is owned by

the Appellant.

This main averment was dealt with the issue No. 02 during the trial as follows:

Are the owners of the land called Mahaliyangodawatta situated to

the West of the corpus entitled to a strip of land 12 feet wide along

the Northern boundary of the corpus according to the amended

answer of the 2nd and 3rd Defendants? - (Answer - No)

According to 2nd Defendant-Respondents submissions, Mahaliyangodawatta

referred above Lot 1 of Udayargewatta which is the corpus, both owned by one

Siththi Jesm and Jeminoor at one time. When Siththi Jesm Jeminoor conveyed

rights to the corpus to the Appellant by Deed No. 13582 P11 they have

specifically excluded the 12 feet strip of land which provided access from VC

Road on the West to the Mahaliyangodawatta to the North East. He further

submitted that the ownership of Mahaliyangodawatta had already been with 2nd

Defendant on deed 3V3, long before the Appellant perches interest in the corpus

on deed P11 and also the evidence of the Appellant shows that where the 12 feet

strip of land used as an access to the Mahaliyangodawatta.

It also seen from the alleged judgment of the learned District Judge, according to

Deed P11 the 12 feet wide road is not given specifically along the Northern

Boundary of the Corpus.

According to deeds P11 and 3V3, the 2nd Defendant-Appellant is only entitled a

strip of land 12 feet wide through any area of the corpus to Gamsaba Road.

It is to be noted that the 2nd Defendant-Respondent asking a right of way only on

the basis of the above deeds as P11 and 3V3. Clearly those two deeds do not give

4

the right to demand the strip of land only along the Northern Boundary of the

Corpus. Therefore, it is my view that there is no bare for the 2nd Defendant-

Respondent to entitled the 12 feet strip land over the corpus in order to get to his

adjoining land according to his 3V3 deed (vide P11 at page 302).

In Kandaiah vs Seenitamby [17 NLR 29] it was held that,

The evidence to establish a prescriptive servitude of way must be precise

and definite. It must relate to a defined track, and must not consist of proof

of mere straying across an open land at any point which is at the moment

most convenient.

Therefore, I am of the view that the 2nd Respondent has established his way of

right and learned District Judge has correctly held with Respondent according to

the said deeds and the evidence placed on before him.

In the circumstances, I see no reason to interfere with the judgment.

Therefore, I dismiss the appeal with costs fixed as 15,000/-.

Appeal dismissed

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL