1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C A (Writ) Application

No. 12/2018

In the matter of an application for

mandates in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari and Mandamus in terms of

Article 140 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Puhunu Vidyapeeta Ha Upadhidhari Guru

Sangamaya,

No. 36/2,

Radawana Road,

Yakkala.

PETITIONER

-Vs-

2

1. Hon. Akila Viraj Kariyawasam,

Minister of Education,

Ministry of Education,

Isurupaya,

Battaramulla.

2. W M Jayantha Wickremanayake

Director of Education,

(National Schools Branch)

Ministry of Education,

Isurupaya,

Battaramulla.

3. Sunil Hettiarachchi,

Secretary to the Ministry of

Education,

Ministry of Education,

Isurupaya,

Battaramulla.

4. A Kulathunga,

3

Secretary,

Public Service Commission,

No. 177,

Nawala Road,

Narahenpita,

Colombo 05.

5. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

Before: P. Padman Surasena J (PIC A)

Arjuna Obeyesekere J

Counsel: Lakshan Dias with Chinthaka Hettiarachchi f@r the Petitioner.

Nayomi Kahawita SC for Respondents.

4

Supported on: 2018 - 05 - 31

Decided on: 2018 - 06 - 08

ORDER

P Pad man Surasena J

The Petitioner who claims that it is a trade union dedicated for the welfare

and defending rights of the school teachers of Sri Lanka, seeks to

challenge in this application, the decision of the 3rd Respondent referred to

in the prayers of this application.

When this case was supported for notices by the learned counsel for the

Petitioner on 2018-05-31, learned State Counsel appearing for the

Respondents informed court that she would be taking up a preliminary

objection to the maintainability of this case.

It is the position of the Respondents that this application cannot be

maintained in view of Article 61 A of the Constitution. The said Article is as

follows,

5

'~ ......... subject to the provisions of paragraph (1), (2), (3), (4) and (5) of

Article 126, no court or tribunal shall have power or jurisdiction to inquire

into, or pronounce upon or in any manner call in question any order or

decision made by the Commission, a committee, or any public officer, in

pursuance of any power or duty conferred or imposed on such

Commission, or delegated to a Committee or public officer, under this

chapter or under any other law. .... "

The judgments, namely

i. Katugampola Vs. Commissioner General of Exercise and others

(2003(3) 5 L R 207) which was decided in 2003,

ii. Rathnasiri and others Vs. Ellawala and others (2004 (2) 5 LR 180)

which was decided in 2004 and

iii. Dissanayake Vs. Salahudeen and others. C A 250/ 2013 and 251/

2013 (decided on 2014-02-12) which was decided in 2014

show that this Court has consistently held that the provisions in Article 61 A

ousts the writ jurisdiction of this Court and grants exclus,ive jurisdiction to

6

the Supreme Court to hear and determine all such matters coming under

the scope and ambit of that Article.

This court in all the above cases without any hesitation has upheld the

preliminary objection raised on behalf of the Respondents in those cases

that the ouster clause in Article 61 A would, be a bar to entertain those

writ applications. The preliminary objection taken up on behalf of the

Respondents in this case is also the same.

Learned State Counsel tendered to this Court the Gazette Extraordinary of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka bearing No. 1941/41 dated

2015-11-20 by which the Public Service Commission has delegated its

powers of transferring the teachers of Teachers' Service of Sri Lanka to the

Secretary to the Ministry in charge of the subject of education or an

Additional Secretary nominated by the Secretary and approved by the

Public Service Commission.

Petitioner has failed to counter the preliminary objection raised by the

learned State Counsel before this Court in the instant case.

7

We see no reason to deviate from the above line of judgments. We

therefore uphold the preliminary objection raised by the learned State

Counsel on behalf of the Respondents and proceed to dismiss this

application in limine.

Application dismissed in limine.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Arjuna Obeyesekere J

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL