IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA C.A. Application No: 78/2016

Deepak Kumar Krishnakumar Vasanji, Lal & Sons, No: 5, Kotalawala Place, Colombo 04.

Petitioner Vs. Hon. Ravi Karunanayake, Minister of Finance, and 05 others

Respondents

C.A. 78/2016 An Application for Writs of Certiorari, Prohibition and

Mandamus

Before Vijith K. Malalgoda,P.C.J.(P/CA) &

P. Padman Surasena,J.

Counsel K. Deekiriwewa with L.M. Deekiriwewa, Mrs. M.K. Herath

and Mrs. Samantha Ramanayake for the Petitioner

Milinda Gunathilaka,D.S.G. for the Respondents

Argued &

Decided on 08.06.2016.

Vijith K. Malalgoda,P.C.J.(P/CA)

Heard the learned counsel for the Petitioner as well as the learned

Deputy Solicitor General representing the Respondents.

In this case the main issue raised by the learned counsel for the

Petitioner is that the gazette in question which is produced marked 'X2' had

been signed by the State Minister of Finance who is not a cabinet rank

Minister. When this matter came up on the last date i.e. 17.05.2015, the

learned Deputy Solicitor General informed Court that His Excellency the

President has properly appointed the State Minister of Finance as the Acting

Minister of Finance under Article 49 of the Constitution and he undertook to

submit a copy of the said appointment before this Court. By way of a motion t

dated 18.05.2016 the learned Deputy Solicitor General has now filed the

relevant document marked 'X'. We observe that the said document refers to

the appointment of the State Minister of Finance, Hon. Lakshman Yapa

Abeywardana as the Acting Minister of Finance until the Hon. Minister of

Finance is returned to Sri Lanka under Article 49. This appointment was made

on 03.10.2015. The impugned gazette before us produced marked 'X2' is

dated 09.10.2015. We observe that there is a proper appointment made

under Article 49 of the Constitution by His Excellency the President prior to this

gazette is issued by the Acting Minister. Even in the gazette notification the

said Hon. Lakshman Yapa Abeywardana had signed the gazette notification as

Acting Minister of Finance. However, the learned counsel for the Petitioner

whilst referring to Article 44 of the Constitution submits that a non- cabinet

rank Minister cannot be appointed to act as a Cabinet Rank Minister.

We see no merit in this argument raised by the learned counsel for the

Petitioner. Under Article 49 the only qualification to be appointed as an Acting

Minister is to be a member of Parliament. We observe that this is the only

ground raised by the learned counsel for the Petitioner challenging 'X2' before

this Court. When considering all these issues, we are not inclined to issue

1 i l

1 1

I I

1 I I \ t

~ I

~

\

notices in this matter and therefore, we refuse notices and dismiss this

application.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

P.Padman Surasena,J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Cr/-