==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0255/2023

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Section

331 (3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure

Act No.15 of 1979.

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Complainant

Vs.

Uchenna Chigbo Ezeokonkwo

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Uchenna Chigbo Ezeokonkwo

Accused-Appellant

Vs

Hon. Attorney General,

The Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant-Respondent

Court of Appeal Case No: CA/HCC/0255/23

High Court of Colombo Case No: HC/641/2018

CA/HCC/0255/2023

2 | P a g e

Before : P Kumararatnam, J.

Pradeep Hettiarachchi, J.

Counsel : Dilan Ratnayake P.C. with Vivendra Ratnayake, Ashani

Kankanamge and Nipun Nawarathna instructed by

Priyanga Balakrishna for the Accused-Appellant.

: Tharaka Kodagoda SC for the Respondent.

Argued on : 17.03.2026

Decided on : 25.06.2026

Pradeep Hettiarachchi, J

Judgement

1. The Appellant was indicted before the High Court of Colombo on four counts, namely,

a. Possession of 245.19 grams of Cocaine, an offence punishable under Section

54A(d) of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs (Amendment) Ordinance

No. 13 of 1984;

b. Trafficking of 245.19 grams of Cocaine, an offence punishable under Section

54A(c) of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs (Amendment) Ordinance

No. 13 of 1984;

c. Possession of 836.69 grams of Cocaine, an offence punishable under Section

54A(d) of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs (Amendment) Ordinance

No. 13 of 1984;

d. Trafficking of 836.69 grams of Cocaine, an offence punishable under Section

54A(c) of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs (Amendment) Ordinance

No. 13 of 1984;

CA/HCC/0255/2023

3 | P a g e

2. At the conclusion of the trial, the Learned High Court Judge convicted the Appellant

on the 1st and 2nd counts and acquitted him on the 3rd and 4th counts. Accordingly, the

Appellant was sentenced to death in respect of the 1st and 2nd counts.

3. In the present appeal, the Appellant has advanced seven grounds of appeal challenging

the conviction and sentence imposed by the Learned High Court Judge of Colombo.

4. Facts of this matter can be summarized as follows;

5. The Appellant is a Nigerian national married to a Sri Lankan woman. The raid in

question was conducted by officers attached to the Police Narcotics Bureau. According

to PW1 Subhoda, the operation was organised upon information received from one of

his private informants, who had provided him with the Appellant’s telephone number.

6. PW1 thereafter contacted the Appellant using the said number and posed as a

prospective purchaser of drugs. According to the prosecution, the Appellant was

arrested at the KFC car park in Rajagiriya when he handed over to PW1 a parcel

containing cocaine. Notably, neither the Appellant's arrest nor the handing over of the

parcel to PW1 was challenged by the defence at trial or in the present appeal.

7. The Appellant’s position was that a foreign national named “Izu” had handed over the

parcel to him with instructions to deliver it to a person who would arrive at the car park

pursuant to a telephone call received on his mobile phone. According to the Appellant,

he had been travelling in a hired PickMe vehicle when the said Izu entered the same

vehicle and handed over the parcel, which was later found to contain cocaine.

8. The Appellant contended that he was unaware that the parcel contained cocaine, as he

had no opportunity to examine its contents. He further stated that, during the journey,

an argument arose between him and the said Izu, prompting Izu to alight from the

vehicle while leaving the parcel in the Appellant’s possession.

9. The grounds of appeal advanced by the Appellant are as follows:

a. No conscious possession of the alleged drugs;

CA/HCC/0255/2023

4 | P a g e

b. Failure to evaluate that the requisite mental element was not present;

c. Prosecution evidence relating to the 2nd raid was unreliable and contradictory;

d. PW1, who was the main witness in a Trial at Bar case HC (TAB) No. 3887/2022,

dated 06.04.2023, was held to be unreliable and untrustworthy;

e. Probability and the integrity of the raid were in question;

f. No fair investigation;

g. The sentence imposed by the Learned High Court Judge is excessive.

10. The first two grounds of appeal are interrelated and may conveniently be considered

together. The Appellant contended that it was the said “Izu” who handed over the bag

to him with instructions to deliver it to another person, and, therefore, he had no

knowledge of the contents of the parcel. Accordingly, it was argued that the Appellant

did not have conscious possession of the drugs contained therein.

11. It was further submitted that the evidence of PW18, the driver of the PickMe vehicle,

corroborated the defence version that the bag containing cocaine had been handed over

to the Appellant by another person. Additionally, the Appellant argued that the evidence

of PW1 establishes that, upon his arrest, he repeatedly requested permission to

telephone Izu, the person who allegedly handed over the parcel to him, but that PW1

refused to permit such communication.

12. Premised on the foregoing, the Appellant contended that the Learned Trial Judge had

failed to sufficiently evaluate the evidence, particularly with regard to the absence of

the requisite mental element necessary to convict him on counts 1 and 2. The Appellant

placed considerable reliance on the decisions in Van Der Hultes vs. Attorney General

[1989] 1 Sri L.R 204 and Sumanawathi Perera vs. Attorney General (1998) 2 Sri L.R.

20, and submitted that mere possession, without proof of conscious possession or

knowledge of the nature of the substance, is insufficient in law to sustain a conviction.

13. The respondent, on the other hand, contended that there existed ample evidence

establishing that the Appellant had knowledge of the nature of the substance in question

and, therefore, that conscious possession had been proved beyond reasonable doubt.

14. The evidence reveals that PW1 continuously communicated with the Appellant over

the telephone, pursuant to the information received from his informant, until the

CA/HCC/0255/2023

5 | P a g e

Appellant arrived at the car park where he was eventually arrested. The telephone

records marked in evidence confirmed the incoming and outgoing calls made to and

from the Appellant’s mobile phone. Significantly, the mobile phone used by the

Appellant contained dual SIM cards, and the numbers used by him ended in ….6859

and ….1405 respectively.

15. More importantly, according to PW1, when the Appellant entered PW1’s vehicle, he

opened the parcel and showed the substance contained therein to PW1 while discussing

the price. Such conduct, if accepted, is strongly indicative of the Appellant’s knowledge

of the contents of the parcel and materially supports the prosecution’s position that the

Appellant was in conscious possession of the cocaine.

16. In this regard, the following principles set out by Lord Wilberforce in Warner vs.

Metropolitan Police Commissioner (1968) 52 Criminal Appeal Report 373 are of

much relevance.

"The question, to which an answer is required, and in the end a jury must answer

it, is whether in the circumstances the accused should be held to have possession of

the substance, rather than mere control. In order to decide between these two, the

jury should, in my opinion, be invited to consider all the circumstances - to use

again the words of Pollock & Wright, Possession in the Common Law, p. 119 - the

'modes or events' by which the custody commences and the legal incident in which

it is held. By these I mean, relating them to typical situations, that they must

consider the manner and circumstances in which the substance, or something which

contains it, had been received, what knowledge or means of knowledge or guilty

knowledge as to the presence of the substance, or as to the nature of what has been

received, the accused had at the time of receipt or thereafter up to the moment when

he is found with it; his legal relation to the substance or package (including his

right of access to it). On such matters as these (not exhaustively stated) they must

make the decision whether, in addition to physical control, he has, or ought to have

imputed to him the intention to possess, or knowledge that he does possess, what is

in fact a prohibited substance. If he has this intention or knowledge, it is not

additionally necessary that he should know the nature of the substances."

CA/HCC/0255/2023

6 | P a g e

17. These observations have been applied in Re vs. Edmond Levis, 87 Criminal Appeal

Report 270 as well.

18. In this regard, the following passage by R.S. Wright [Pollock and Wright] in their

admirable book “An Essay on Possession in Common Law” [1888 Part III Chapter 1

page 119] would be of much relevance.

“The ‘modes or events’ by which the custody commences and the legal incident in

which it is held. By these I mean, relating them to typical situations, that they [the

jury] must consider the manner and circumstances in which the substance or

something which contains it, has been received, what knowledge or means of

knowledge or guilty knowledge as to the presence of the substance, or as to the

nature of what has been received, the accused had at the time of receipt or thereafter

up to the moment when he is found with it; his legal relation to the substance or

package (including his right of access to it) On such matters as these (not

exhaustively stated) they [the jury] must make the decision whether, in addition to

physical control, he has, or ought to have imputed to him the intention to possess

or knowledge that he does possess what is in fact a prohibited substance. If he has

this intention or knowledge, it is not additionally necessary that he should know the

nature of the substance.”

19. In the present case, it is significant to emphasize that the evidence of PW1, to the effect

that the Appellant opened the parcel and showed the substance while they were inside

the van, was not challenged in cross-examination by the defence.

20. It is trite law that where material portions of a witness’s testimony are not challenged

in cross-examination and remain uncontroverted, such evidence may be treated as

having been accepted and proved, unless there are inherent improbabilities or other

evidence to the contrary.

21. In Motilal vs. State of Madhya Pradesh 1990 CRI LJ No.: 125, held absence of cross-

examination of a prosecution witness of certain facts leads to the inference of admission

of that fact.

CA/HCC/0255/2023

7 | P a g e

22. In Edrick de In Silva vs. Chandradasa de Silva 70 N.L.R. 169 at 170, Justice H.N.G.

Fernando observed;

"When there is ample opportunity to contradict the evidence of a witness but is not

impugned or assailed in cross-examination, that is a special fact and feature to the

case. It is a matter falling within the definition of the word ''prove'' in Section 3 of

the Evidence Ordinance, and as Trial Judge of Court must necessarily take that fact

into consideration in adjudicating the issue before it".

23. In the case of Himachal Pradesh vs. Thakur Oass (1983) 2 Cri. L.J. 1694 at 1701, V.

D. Misra CJ held: "Whenever a statement of fact made by a witness is not challenged

in cross-examination, it has to be concluded that the fact in question is not disputed"

24. The Indian judgment of Sarvan Singh vs. State of Punjab (2002 AIR SC (iii) 3652),

pages 3655 and 3656, was cited in the case of Ratnayake Mudiyanselage

Premachandra vs. The Hon. Attorney General C.A Case No. 79/2011, decided on

04.04.2017 as follows:

“It is a rule of essential justice that whenever the opponent has declined to avail

himself of the opportunity to put his case in cross-examination, it must follow that

the evidence tendered on that issue ought to be accepted.”

25. In the case of Ajith Samarakoon vs. Attorney-General (Kobeigane Murder Case)

[2004] (2) Sri LR 209 at 230, Ninian Jayasuriya, J. held that, “Evidence not challenged

or impugned in cross-examination can be considered as admitted and is provable

against the accused.”

26. Thus, in the present case, the testimony of PW1 regarding the Appellant’s act of

showing the cocaine while inside the van remained unchallenged and may, therefore,

be accepted as proved. Had the Appellant been unaware of the nature of the substance,

it is unlikely that he would have shown it to PW1 and discussed its price.

27. Further, it is evident that “Izu” allegedly handed over the parcel to the Appellant only

when he was alighting from the vehicle. The evidence of PW18 confirms that there was

an altercation between the Appellant and Izu while they were travelling in the cab.

CA/HCC/0255/2023

8 | P a g e

Moreover, there is no evidence to suggest that Izu made any telephone calls while inside

the vehicle. In that backdrop, it is difficult, if not impossible, to accept the inference

that the Appellant was unaware of the contents of the parcel handed over to him by Izu.

28. Accordingly, the prosecution has established conscious possession of cocaine beyond a

reasonable doubt. In these circumstances, the first two grounds of appeal advanced by

the Appellant are devoid of merit and are accordingly dismissed.

29. The Appellant further contended that, since the Learned High Court Judge had found

the prosecution evidence relating to the second recovery of cocaine from the premises

where the Appellant resided to be contradictory and unreliable, the conviction on counts

1 and 2, which were based on the testimony of the same witnesses, cannot be sustained.

30. It is, however, to be noted that the Learned Trial Judge acquitted the Appellant on counts

3 and 4 not on the basis that the evidence of PW1 was disbelieved or found to be

untrustworthy, but on the ground that, at the time of the alleged recovery, the Appellant

was not present at the premises where the cocaine was discovered and that the said

contraband was not in his exclusive possession or control.

31. In these circumstances, the acquittal of the Appellant on counts 3 and 4 does not, in my

view, in any way affect the conviction entered on counts 1 and 2, nor does it undermine

the credibility or reliability of the evidence of PW1.

32. It was further argued that PW1, the principal witness for the prosecution, had previously

been held to be an unreliable witness by three Judges of the Trial-at-Bar and that,

therefore, it would be unsafe to sustain the present conviction on his evidence.

33. It must, however, be stated that a witness may be regarded as unreliable or

untrustworthy in a particular trial owing to the existence of contradictions,

inconsistencies, or infirmities in the evidence given in that specific case.

34. However, that does not mean that such a witness must invariably be regarded as

unreliable in every case in which he testifies. The credibility of a witness must always

CA/HCC/0255/2023

9 | P a g e

be assessed in the context of the particular facts and circumstances of the case before

the Court.

35. Conversely, if a witness who had previously been considered reliable in another case

were to give evidence riddled with contradictions and infirmities in a subsequent case,

the Court would not be justified in disregarding such infirmities merely because the

witness had earlier been accepted as credible. Therefore, the reliability or otherwise of

a witness cannot be determined in the abstract, but must depend upon the quality and

consistency of the evidence adduced in the particular proceedings under consideration.

36. Accordingly, the contention of the defence that the evidence of PW1 must be treated as

unreliable solely in light of the observations made in the Trial-at-Bar proceedings is

devoid of merit.

37. Moreover, the Appellant contended that the prosecution’s failure to produce “show

money” rendered the probability of the raid doubtful. However, the evidence reveals

that the raid was conducted pursuant to information received by PW1 from one of his

private informants. PW1 had posed as a prospective purchaser and continuously

communicated with the Appellant through mobile telephone number 0750281405.

38. Therefore, the absence of “show money” in the course of the raid does not, in my view,

render the prosecution's version improbable, as the use of show money is not an

indispensable or mandatory requirement in every raid of this nature. More importantly,

the evidence of PW1 regarding the sequence of events that culminated in the raid does

not indicate that the operation necessitated the use of show money.

39. The evidence further establishes that, on the date of the raid, PW1 received a call from

telephone number 0758436859. Following the arrest of the Appellant, the police

recovered three mobile phones from his possession. One of the said mobile phones

contained dual SIM cards bearing the numbers 0750281405 and 0758436859,

respectively.

CA/HCC/0255/2023

10 | P a g e

40. The telephone details produced in evidence materially corroborate the testimony of

PW1 regarding his communications with the Appellant prior to the arrest and lend

substantial support to the prosecution's version of the raid.

41. The Appellant further questioned the propriety of reporting facts to the Magistrate’s

Court of Mahara, which was situated outside the territorial jurisdiction where the raid

had been conducted, and thereby contended that the investigation lacked fairness.

42. According to the prosecution evidence, the facts were initially reported to the

Magistrate’s Court of Mahara, and the Appellant was also first produced before that

Court. However, pursuant to the directions issued by the Learned Magistrate of Mahara,

the Appellant was subsequently produced before the Magistrate’s Court of Colombo.

Thereafter, upon an application made to the Magistrate’s Court of Colombo, the

telephone details necessary for the investigation were obtained.

43. Moreover, PW1 satisfactorily explained to the Court that he initially reported facts to

the Magistrate’s Court of Mahara as the information first received by him indicated that

the trafficking operation had been organised from within the Mahara Prison.

Furthermore, the information received by PW1 had been contemporaneously recorded

at page 168 of his pocket notebook, which was produced and marked in evidence as P2.

44. Therefore, the initial production of the Appellant before the Magistrate’s Court of

Mahara has not caused any prejudice to the Appellant, nor has it affected the legality of

the raid or the subsequent investigation. No material was placed before this Court to

establish that the Appellant’s right to a fair trial was either infringed or denied by reason

of the procedure adopted by the investigators. Accordingly, I find no merit in the

aforesaid ground advanced by the Appellant.

45. It was further contended that, at the commencement of the trial, the Appellant was

arraigned on only three counts despite the indictment containing four counts. It was

therefore argued that the Appellant’s plea of not guilty to all four counts was not

properly recorded, and that such procedural irregularity had resulted in a denial of a fair

trial.

CA/HCC/0255/2023

11 | P a g e

46. However, it appears that the said irregularity was not a substantial defect, but rather a

mere typographical error. More importantly, the Appellant was duly represented by

Counsel throughout the proceedings. An examination of the manner in which cross-

examination was conducted by the defence makes it manifest that the Appellant was

not misled by the said error, as the defence proceeded on the clear basis that the

Appellant had been indicted on four counts.

47. Accordingly, it is my considered view that no prejudice was caused to the Appellant by

reason of the said error, and therefore the contention advanced in this regard cannot be

sustained.

48. I shall now consider whether the Learned Trial Judge has adequately evaluated the

defence evidence. The Appellant contended that the Learned High Court Judge erred

both in law and in fact by failing to properly analyze and appreciate the defence case,

particularly with regard to the alleged involvement of one “Izu”, whose participation,

according to the Appellant, was corroborated even by certain prosecution witnesses,

thereby giving rise to a reasonable doubt in the prosecution case.

49. The Appellant placed considerable reliance on the evidence of PW18, who was the

driver of the vehicle in which the Appellant travelled to the KFC car park at Rajagiriya.

According to the testimony of PW18, the Appellant initially entered his vehicle at the

Keells Super Market on Cotta Road, Borella. Thereafter, the Appellant instructed PW18

to proceed to Chandrika Lane, stating that he intended to pick up a friend.

50. PW18 further stated that, upon reaching Chandrika Lane, another foreign national

carrying a parcel entered the vehicle. Subsequently, PW18 drove towards McDonald’s

at Nugegoda, during which journey the Appellant telephoned a person and requested

him to come either to KFC or Pizza Hut at Battaramulla. According to PW18, at that

stage, the other foreign national handed over the parcel to the Appellant and thereafter

got down from the vehicle. Thereafter, acting on the instructions of the Appellant,

PW18 proceeded to the KFC car park at Rajagiriya, where the alleged raid ultimately

took place. However, this version is in stark contrast to the evidence given by the

Appellant.

CA/HCC/0255/2023

12 | P a g e

51. According to the Appellant, it was only after Izu handed over the parcel to him that Izu

gave him a telephone in order to enable him to communicate with the person to whom

the parcel was to be delivered, in accordance with Izu’s instructions. The Appellant, in

his testimony, stated that it was Izu who invited him to accompany him when the cab

arrived and that, during the journey, Izu handed over the parcel to the Appellant with

instructions to deliver it to a person at KFC Rajagiriya.

52. Accordingly, the Appellant contended that the Learned Trial Judge failed to properly

appreciate this aspect of the defence case and did not adequately analyze and evaluate

the testimony of PW18, which, according to the Appellant, casts a doubt on his

complicity in the offences charged in the indictment.

53. As admitted by the Appellant in his testimony, Izu had been residing with him at

Serpentine Road, Borella, and had jointly signed the lease agreement relating to the

house in which they lived. Although the Appellant stated that both he and Izu were

engaged in the textile business, it transpired during cross-examination that the

Appellant possessed no meaningful knowledge regarding the business of exporting

textiles.

54. Given the close association between the Appellant and Izu, particularly the fact that

they were residing in the same house and had jointly executed the lease agreement, it

is difficult to accept that the Appellant would have received the parcel from Izu without

being aware of its contents.

55. Furthermore, one of the mobile phones recovered from the Appellant’s possession

contained dual SIM cards bearing the numbers 0750281405 and 0758436859. The

telephone details relating to the said SIM cards marked as P46 confirm that it was the

Appellant who communicated with PW1, with calls being both originated from and

received to the same numbers. In these circumstances, the Appellant’s version is

inherently improbable and cannot be accepted as truthful.

56. The Learned Trial Judge has adequately analyzed and evaluated the evidence adduced

on behalf of both the prosecution and the defence, and has set out sufficient reasons for

CA/HCC/0255/2023

13 | P a g e

his findings. More importantly, the Learned Trial Judge has clearly explained why he

was not inclined to accept the evidence adduced on behalf of the defence.

57. Hence, I find no reason to interfere with the findings of the Learned Trial Judge.

Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.

58. Nevertheless, it is apt to place on record the manner in which both Learned Counsel

argued this appeal. They were well-prepared and precise in their submissions on the

respective grounds of appeal. A special word of appreciation is due to the young

Learned State Counsel, whose submissions were advanced meticulously and with

commendable clarity, thereby facilitating the Court in its task of analyzing the issues

raised.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal