IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

CA (Writ) Application No. 421/2013

In the matter of an Application in terms of

Article 140 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

for mandates in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari and Mandamus

B.T.M.R.P. Maddegama

No. 116/ A, Ganegama, Pelmadulla.

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. Land Reform Commission,

No. C. 82, Gregory's Avenue,Colombo 7.

2. Sampath Subasingharachchi,

Chairman,

Land Reform Commission,

No. C. 82, Gregory's Avenue,Colombo 7.

3. Oman Ekanayake

4. Ruwan Ekanayake

5. Stephan Ekanayake

6. Sumana Ekanayake

7. Dharma Ekanayake

All of whom at Malwatta, Godakawela.

RESPONDENTS

1

Before:

Counsel:

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

Thisath Wijayagunewardena with Janaka Balasuriya for the Petitioner

S.S.Sahabandu, P.C with Udayanthi Rajapakse for the 1st and 2nd

Respondents

1 Shihan Wijayagunewardena for the 3rd and sth Respondents

Written Submissions: Tendered on behalf of the Petitioner on 30th August 2018

and 9th January 2019

Decided on:

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

Tendered on behalf of the l stand 2ndRespondents on 18th

September 2018

Tendered on behalf of the 3rdand SthRespondents on 20th

September 2018

ih May 2019

When this matter was taken up for argument on 19th July 2018, the learned

Counsel for all parties moved that this Court pronounce judgment on the written

submissions that would be tendered by the parties.

The issue that arises for determination in this application is the procedure that

should be followed by the 1st Respondent, the Land Reform Commission where

there are competing claims for ownership of lands in declarations made to the

Land Reform Commission. A determination of this issue requires this Court to

2

engage in a discussion on several sections of the Land Reform Law, No.1 of 1972,

as amended and in particular on the procedure set out in Section 4 of the said

Law.

The Land Reform Law No.1 of 1972 (the Law) is the first law enacted under the

Constitution bf 1972 by the National State Assembly of the Republic of Sri Lanka,

and came into operation on 26th August 1972. In its long title, the said Law was

stated to be a "Law to establish a Land Reform Commission, to fix a ceiling on the

extent of agricultural land that may be owned by persons, to provide for the

vesting of lands owned in excess of such ceiling in the Land Reform Commission

and for such land to be held by the former owners on a statutory lease from the

Commission, to prescribe the purposes and the manner of disposition by the

Commission of agricultural lands vested in the Commission so as to increase

productivity and employment, to provide for the payment of compensation to

persons deprived of their lands under this Law and for matters connected

therewith or incidental thereto."

Section 3 of the Law reads as follows:

liOn and after the date of commencement of this Law the maximum extent

of agricultural land which may be owned by any person, in this Law referred

to as the "ceiling", shall

(a) if such land consists exclusively of paddy land, be twenty-five acres; or

3

(b) if such land does not consist exclusively of paddy land, be fifty acres, so

however that the total extent of any paddy land, if any, comprised in

such fifty acres shall not exceed the ceiling on paddy land specified in

paragraph (a).

In terms of' Section 2 of the Law, the Land Reform Commission has been

established with the object of ensuring that no person shall own agricultural land

in excess of the said ceiling, and to take over agricultural land owned by any

person in excess of the ceiling and to utilize such land in a manner which will

result in an increase in its productivity and in the employment generated from

such land.

In terms of Section 3(2), "any agricultural land owned by any person in excess of

the ceiling on the date of commencement of this Law shall as from that date be

deemed to vest in the Commission, and be deemed to be held by such person

under a statutory lease from the Commission."

The requirement for a person who holds agricultural land over and above the

ceiling to declare such agricultural land is provided for in Section 18(1) of th~ Law,

which reads as follows:

"The Commission may, by Order published in the Gazette .... , direct that

every person who becomes the statutory lessee of any agricultural land shall,

within a month from the date of the publication of the Order, or of becoming

a statutory lessee under this Law make a declaration, in this Law referred to

4

as a IIstatutory declaration 11, in the prescribed form of the total extent of the

agricultural land so held by him on such lease.

Section 19 of the Law contains the provisions that shall apply upon the receipt by

the Land Reform Commission of a statutory declaratIon made-under section 18:

- ) --

I/(a) The Commission shall, as soon as practicable, make a determination, in

this Law referred to as a IIstatutory determination 11, specifying the

portion or portions of the agricultural land owned by the statutory

lessee which he shall be allowed to retain. In making such

determination the Commission shall take into consideration the

preference or preferences, if any, expressed by such lessee in the

declaration as to the portion or portions of such land that he may be

allowed to retain.

(b) The Commission shall publish the statutory determination in the

Gazette and shall also send a copy thereof to such lessee by registered

letter through the post. Such determination shall be final and

conclusive, and shall not be called in question in any court, whether by

way of writ or otherwise."

A detailed structure of the Law has been set out by the Supreme Court in

Jinawathie and others vs Emalin Perera1.

1 1986 (2) Sri LR 121.

5

The Petitioner claims that he is a co-owner of lands situated within the Malwatte

nindagama, Ratnapura. The pedigree relating to the said land and the manner in

which the Petitioner and his predecessors in title have derived ownership to the

said land have been set out in paragraph 6 of the petition. The Petitioner claims

further that bis predecessors in title have __ been in uninterru_pted and undisturbed

possession of=the--sa-i-d--nincta-gama for a- peries of over 300 years. l=he Petitione-r

has stated that the title of the said declarants to the said nindagama have been

upheld by the District Court of Ratnapura in Case Nos. 185 and 1175, as evidenced

by the Decrees in the said cases, annexed to the petition marked 'X6(jv)' and

'X6(vii)', respectively.

The Petitioner states that in 1974, his predecessors in title had made two

statutory declarations bearing Nos. R/175 and R/176 in terms of the Land Reform

Law in respect of several lands including the said Malwatte nindagama. The

Petitioner states that even though the 1st Respondent had issued the Statutory

Determinations in terms of Section 19(2) of the Law to the said predecessors in

respect of other lands, the said nindagama had not formed part of the said

Statutory Determinations. 2

The Petitioner states that one Hatanaarchchi Mohottalage Mudiyanse, who is the

predecessor in title of the 3rd -7th Respondents too had made a statutory

declaration bearing No. R/l06 under the Land Reform Law in respect of the said

nindagama. The 3rd -i h Respondents have set out in their Statement of

Objections, their chain of title to the said nindagama. The 3rd - i h Respondents

2 Copies of the said determinations have been annexed to the petition marked 'X l ' - 'X4' ,

6

too have claimed that their chain of title has been proved in District Court of

Embilipitiya Case No. 9409/L,3 which has been disputed by the Petitioner and, in

District Court of Embilipitiya Case No. 8289/L,4 where on appeal, a re-trial has

been ordered. This Court observes that the title pleaded by the Petitioner as well

as the title of the 3rd - ih Respondents originate from the same-source, namely a

sannasa issued -m around 1683 by King Rajasinghe II to MaKandure

Dharmalankara Seneviratne Panditha Mudaliyar.

Thus, with two parties making separate statutory declarations in respect of the

same land, the provisions of Section 4 of the Law would have to be followed by

the Land Reform Commission. Section 4 is re-produced below:

11(1) Where there is a dispute between parties as to the ownership of any

agricultural land which is subject to the ceiling the Commission may, after

such inquiry as it may deem fit, make an interim order declaring one of such

parties to be entitled to the possession of such agricultural land. Every

interim order shall be published in the Gazette and shall come into force on

the date of such publication.

(2) Within two weeks of the publication of the interim order in the Gazette

the Commission of its own motion or any of the parties to the dispute

referred to in subsection (1) may refer such dispute to a court of competent

jurisdiction for final adjudication.

3 Copy of the judgment has been marked as 'R4b'.

4 Copy of the judgment has been marked as 'RSb'.

7

(3) Till the final order is made by a court on such reference, the interim order

shall be valid and effectual and shall not be called in question in any court by

way of writ or otherwise. So long and for so long only as the interim order is

in force the person declared by such interim order to be entitled to possess

the agricultura l land shalJ~~ deern~d for th_e_purp-Qse of sectioo_3 to be the

owner af such agrkulturalland.

(4) As long as the interim order is in force the Commission shall not alienate

the agricultural land to which the interim order relates:

Provided, however, that, where no reference has been made under

subsection (2), the interim order made under subsection (1) shall have the

effect of a final order under subsection (3).

This Court is of the view that Section 4 of the Law does not confer power on the

Land Reform Commission to make a final determination with regard to the

ownership of the land in dispute.s The legislature has quite correctly conferred

that power on a Court of competent jurisdiction, subject to the proviso to Section

4(4). Thus, when there are two competing claims to what appears to be the same

land, it is mandatory that the Land Reform Commission conducts an inquiry it may

deem fit. This Court is also of the view that the Land Reform Commission must,

considering the facts and circumstances of each case, make an interim order, in

order to give effect to the intention of the legislature that all disputes with regard

to ownership must be determined by a Court of competent jurisdiction.

5 The lot Respondent has quite correctly admitted in paragraph 1 of its written submissions that it does not have the expertise to determine questions of ownership.

8

The Petitioner states that the Land Reform Commission, instead of holding an

inquiry in terms of Section 4(1), had made a statutory determination in favour of

Hatanaarchchi Mohottalage Mudiyanse. The said determination has been

published in the Extraordinary Gazette Notification No. 527/13 dated 14th October

1988, annexed to the petition marked 'X7~ ~ The Petitioner ...states that pursuant to

objections raisectbv-th-e-t>-etttioner's father that a determination could not-have

been made under Section 19 of the Law when there was a dispute to the title, the

Land Reform Commission, acting on the advice of the Hon. Attorney General, had

cancelled the said determination 'X7'. The notice cancelling 'X7' had been

published in Extraordinary Gazette Notification No. 1181/19 dated 25th April 2001

and has been annexed to the petition marked 'X8,.6

The Petitioner has annexed to the petition marked 'X9', a letter dated 4th April

2001 sent by the 1st Respondent to a predecessor in title informing him of such

cancellation. 'X9' reads as follows:

U@e>cltD 6165~(S)@65 0 /106 QtD)G;)~ ex., ~e>cSDJ8tD &sS~ ~ei @6.) @(V)

@~65 @ @tDJte65 QCSe> >Ses5 =&::c:J~ ocl tDOeD @~ @ei)tD qotD ei) ~eD ~OeD qeD E)@csS~ (S)z;oC) o~c" (s)oz; 61~~ ~~m CO@~cS tD qe>@o(5J fDac:>cl ~@cl

qe>@oC5;l tD~ og oeoocl 4 (1) e>(S)65~c,:, c,:,C)@cl Sc,,@ o)~~65 fil)z;~e Oa.eDc"cD

tDO @~a tl>C)g~ fDac:>cl 2000-12-29 ~eD oz;e>~ @tl)Je QCSe) >Ses5 eDom,., &DOeD

@~ (Ve> tDoz;eD)~65 ~65e> ."

It is apparent from 'X9' that the reason for the cancellation of the said

determination 'X7' is the failure of the Land Reform Commission to conduct an

inquiry under Section 4(1).

6 The cancellation of 'Xl' had not been challenged by the 3'd - i h Respondents.

9

According to a letter dated 3rd August 2001 annexed to the petition marked 'XIO',

the Petitioner's predecessor in title had been requested by the 1st Respondent to

participate at an inquiry that is scheduled to be held under Section 4 of the Law

for the following purpose - "~~cn ~(5) eDGeD @e)C! OO~~cs5 ~~~)M ~es5

~es5 ~ ~~) @~a I:DC)g~ tffi~ ~~~~es5".

L

The Petitioner claims that even though he participated at the said inquiry which

had been held over several years, the Land Reform Commission failed to inform

him of the outcome of the said inquiry, although he had sent several reminders.

The Petitioner states that 12 years later, in 2013, the Land Reform Commission,

without informing the Petitioner of the outcome of the inquiry that was

conducted in terms of Section 4(1) of the Law, published the following notice in

Extraordinary Gazette No. 1812/3 dated 2ih May 2013, annexed to the petition

marked 'X28':

(foe) 527/13 em 1988 OO.C1Q)6 Q 14 e)Z;eD ~es> ~Oes> ~ @oe) Qd)C1)~~e) Q)de)R

des>Od@d (feD ~ (5)z;c:o<:l ot@d ~(5)~@, @e)aS<im ~oe C!OC)es5~

@)~)~C)@@)@cs5 @~~@Q ~C1@<sS ~<e (foe) 0 /1 06 ~Oes> Qe)~ (f(d@e)

(foe) 4324 ",C)@m ~ ~ ~e)QC)>8C1) eucsSe)c,:, (fe)@o~ C)Ces> @~ (foe) 1181/ 19 ~)

2001 (f@d@ Q 25 e)Z;eD ~es> ~Oes> (f0) ~csS<e (5)z;c:o<:l ot'" @~ (fe)@o(SJ e)0~

@z;@Q).

(foe) 118 1/ 19 - 200 1 ~@ Q 25 e)z;eu ~es>z;0} (feD ~<e (5)z;c:o<:l Ot'" (fe)@o(SJ

tffi(3 ~~es5 es>ce)rn Qoe) 527/ 13 ~) 1988 OO.C1Q)6 Q 14 e)CeD ~es> ~ Oes> Q~ ~<e

10

CS)l:t~C) OQ)@GS ~~eSO>8t'l> ~<sS~oC> 4324 ~@t15 ~ ~ ~~cSo>8a> ~e>c,:) ~@oCSJ

Q)~C) @c0es5 QC>)(s) fiD6. II

Being dissatisfied with the said decision, the Petitioner invoked the Writ

jurisdiction of this Court, seeking inter alia the following relief:

a) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the decision of the 1st Respondent to cancel the

Gazette Notification marked 'X8';

b) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the said Gazette Notification marked 'X28';

c) A Writ of Mandamus to compel the 1st Respondent to make an interim order

under Section 4(1) of the Law and/or to hold a fresh inquiry into the said

dispute between the Petitioner and the 3rd - t h Respondents.

Before considering the legality of 'X28', there are two important matters that this

Court would like to refer to.

The first is that the cancellation by the 1st Respondent of the statutory

determination 'X7' by way of the notification 'X8' was an admission on the part of

the 1st Respondent that it cannot issue a Statutory Determination in respect of a

land where there is a dispute relating to its ownership. In fact, in its Statement of

Objections, the 1st Respondent has admitted that Hatanaarchchi Mohottalage

Mudiyanse made Statutory Declaration No. R/106 in respect of the land referred

11

to by the Petitioner/ that the Petitioner's predecessors too made a declaration in

respect of portions of the said land,8 and that there is therefore a land dispute.9 In

this factual background, this Court is of the view that it was mandatory upon the

Land Reform Commission to make an interim order as provided for by Section

4(1) of the Law, thereby enabling the parties to refer the dispute relating to

ow_nership to a Court of competent jurisdiction.

The second matter is that the 1st Respondent, by issuing the letter 'X9' has

admitted that it is under a statutory obligation to conduct an inquiry in terms of

Section 4(1) of the Law. It is not in dispute that an inquiry was in fact held

between the parties relating to the said dispute. lO

The effect of 'X28' is that the statutory declaration of the 3rd -7th Respondents

has been accepted and the statutory determination 'X7' has been restored. This

Court is of the view that, as admitted by the Land Reform Commission itself,ll the

Land Reform Commission did not have the power to issue the statutory

determination 'X7' in the first instance, in view of the competing claims to the

ownership of the said land and due to the failure to have an inquiry. Thus, on the

face of it, 'X28' is illegal, as there still exists a dispute with regard to ownership of

the said land, which needs to be resolved and therefore, a Statutory

Determination could not have been made.

7 Paragraph 12.

8 Paragraph 13.

9 Paragraph 13.

10 Paragraph 17 of the Statement of Objections of the Lan d Reform Commission.

II Paragraphs 12 and 13 of the Statement of Objections.

12

The decision in 'X28' to accept the statutory declaration of the predecessors of

the 3rd -7th Respondents gives rise to several issues. The Land Reform

Commission is required in terms of Section 4(1) of the Law to inquire into the

competing claims in a manner "as it may deem fit". Thus, while the manner in

which the inquiry is to be conducted has been left to the discretion of the 1st

Re.spuod_ent, 'this Gourt is of the view that tt:le 1st Respondent must afford the

parties a proper hearing and thereafter inform its decision to the parties at the

end of the inquiry. It is not in dispute that the Land Reform Commission did not

conclude the inquiry. It is not in dispute that the Land Reform Commission failed

to inform its decision to the Petitioner or the 3rd - ih Respondents. Furthermore,

it is not in dispute that the Land Reform Commission failed to provide any reasons

for its decision encapsulated in 'X28'.

Given the consequences of accepting a statutory declaration of one party and

making a statutory determination in terms of the said declaration, especially in

view of the fact that such decision affects the property rights of one party, this

Court is of the view that the 1st Respondent was required to provide reasons for

its decision, which the Land Reform Commission has failed to do.

The Land Reform Commission has not even stated to this Court, in its Statement

of Objections the outcome of the inquiry that it conducted from 2001 or the

reasons that led to the publication of 'X28'. It is thus clear that the 1st Respondent

has failed to give reasons for its decision in 'X28', not only to the Petitioner but

even to this Court.

13

The duty to give reasons for a decision has been exhaustively dealt with by the

Supreme Court in Hapuarachchi and others v. Commissioner of Elections and

another12 where it was held as follows:

"Accordingly, an analysis of the attitude of the Courts since the beginning of

the 20t~ century clearly indicates that despite the fact that ther~is no general

duty to give reasons for administrative decisions, the Courts have regarded

the issue in question as a matter affecting the concept of procedural

fairness. Reasons for an administrative decision are essential to correct any

errors and thereby to ensure that a person, who had suffered due to an

unfair decision, is treated according to the standard of fairness. In such a

situation without a statement from the person, who gave the impugned

decision or the order, the decision process would be flawed and the decision

would create doubts in the minds of the aggrieved person as well of the

others, who would try to assess the validity of the decision. Considering the

present process in procedural fairness vis-a-vis, right of the people, there is

no doubt that a statement of reasons for an administrative decision is a

necessary requirement."

In Wijepala v Jayawardene13 Mark Fernando, J considered the necessity to give

reasons, at least to this Court, and held as follows:

122009 (1) Sri L.R. 1. .

13 (S.c. (Application) No. 89/95 - S.c. Minutes of 30.06.1995; referred to in Deepthi Kumara Gunaratne and others vs Dayananda Dissanayake, Commissioner of Elections and another; SC (FR) 56/2008; SC Minutes of 19

th March 2009.

14

"Although openness in administration makes it desirable that reasons be

given for decisions of this kind, in this case I do not have to decide whether

the failure to do so vitiated the decision. However, when this Court is

requested to review such a decision, if the petitioner succeeds in making out

a prima facie case, then the failure to give reasons becomes crucial. If

reasons 'are net disclosed, the inference may have to be drawn that thJs is

because in fact there were no reasons -and so also, if reasons are suggested,

they were in fact not the reasons, which actually influenced the decision in

the first place"

The same view was taken by the Supreme Court in Karunadasa vs Unique Gem

Stones Limited14 where Mark Fernando, J held as follows:

"To say that Natural Justice entitles a party to a hearing does not mean

merely that his evidence and submissions must be heard and recorded; it

necessarily means that he is entitled to a reasoned consideration of the case

which he presents. And whether or not the parties are also entitled to be

told the reasons for the decision, if they are withheld, once judicial review

commences, the decision "may be condemned as arbitrary and

unreasonable"; certainly, the Court cannot be asked to presume that they

were valid reasons, for that would be to surrender its discretion. The 2

nd

respondent's failure to produce the 3rd respondent's recommendation thus

justified the conclusion that there were no valid reasons, and that Natural

Justice had not been observed."

14 1997 (1) Sri L.R. 256

15

If this Court applies the test laid down in Hapuarachchi's case, 'X28' is liable to be

quashed by a Writ of Certiorari due to the failure on the part of the Land Reform

Commission to give reasons for its decision. If this Court were to apply the more

lenient test laid down in Karunadasa's case, which this Court is willing to do, then

the Land Re'form Commission was under a duty to submit to this Court the

material that it relied upon when it came to the conclusion that 'X7' must be

restored and that 'X8' must be cancelled. The Land Reform Commission has failed

in this respect too, which renders its decision in 'X28' liable to be quashed by a

Writ of Certiorari.

In Administrative law by Wade, it has been stated as followS: 15

"The inquiries which matter most in administrative law are those which are

required by statute before the minister may lawfully make some order. If

some part of the statutory procedure has not been properly followed, or

there has been a breach of natural justice, there will have been no valid

inquiry and any order made in consequence, if challenged within any

statutory time limit, can be quashed by the court. Legal irregularity here has

a clear legal result."

It is indeed a matter of regret that a statutory authority in whom all agricultural

land in excess of the ceiling stipulated in the Law was vested by statute, and in

whom responsibility of a very high magnitude was bestowed by the Legislature,

15 11th Edition; page 796.

16

has chosen to act in such an irresponsible manner by publishing 'X28'. State

authorities must understand that wide powers have been bestowed on them in

the public interest and that they are required to act in the best interests of the

public, which unfortunately the 1st Respondent has not done.

In the above circumstances, this Court takes the view that the 1st Respondent

acted outside the ambit of Section 4 of the Law when it restored the statutory

determination in respect of the statutory declaration No. R/106. The said decision

is therefore illegal and liable to be quashed by a Writ of Certiorari. This Court also

takes the view that the 1st Respondent is guilty of procedural impropriety owing

to the failure by the Land Reform Commission to give reasons for its decision and

for that reason too, the aforementioned decision is liable to be quashed.

Taking into consideration all of the circumstances of this case, this Court issues a

Writ of Certiorari to quash the decision of the 1st Respondent to cancel the said

Gazette Notification 'X8' and a Writ of Certiorari to quash the notification 'X28'.

This Court also issues a Writ of Mandamus directing the 1st Respondent to hear

the parties as it may deem fit and to conclude the inquiry it commenced in 2001

under Section 4(1) of the Law and to make an interim order in terms of the law,

together with reasons for such interim order, within 3 months from the date of

this judgment. This Court makes no order with regard to costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

17