CA-PHC- 90-18 Page 1 of 8 25/07/2022 IJ- 32-22

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under and in terms of High Court of Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No 19 of 1990 read with Article 154P of the Constitution of the republic of Sri Lanka. Horathal Pedige Prishriya Rathna Vilochani,Kohombadeniya, Dorawaka.

Registered Owner-Petitioner-Appellant Court of Appeal Application No: CA/PHC/90/18 High Court of Kegalle No: 5380/REV Magistrate Court of Warakapola No: 88608

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General Attorney Generals Department Colombo 12

Respondent

BEFORE :Menaka Wijesundera JNeil Iddawala J COUNSEL :Kasun Liyanage for the Appellant Ridma Kuruwita SC for the Respondents.

Argued on : 15.06.2022

Decided on : 25.07.2022

CA-PHC- 90-18 Page 2 of 8 25/07/2022 IJ- 32-22

Iddawala J

This is an appeal filed against an order of the High Court of Kegalle dated 14.

06.2018, which dismissed the revision application of the appellant in limine. The

said revision application was filed against an order under the Forest Ordinance

as amended by Act No. 65 of 2009 (hereinafter the Act) delivered by the Magistrate

Court of Kegalle on 19.05.2017, which ordered the appellants vehicle (SG 40-

5792) to be confiscated. The appellant is the registered owner of the said vehicle,

and she has preferred the instant appeal to this Court to assess whether the High

Court was justified in dismissing her application in limine.

The counsel for the appellant contends that the impugned order is erroneous as

the learned High Court judge has exceeded the role expected of him at the support

stage of the application by delving into the merits of the matter. The counsel

submitted that he vehemently relies on Sarath Andarahennadi v Officer in

Charge, Police Station Sigiriya CA/PHC/APN/117/2017 CA Minute dated

27.03.2019 in support of this contention.

Sarath Andarahennadi case (supra) was a revision application, and it dealt with

a matter arising from an information filed under Section 66(1)(a) of the Primary

Courts Procedure Act in the Magistrate Court of Dambulla. It dealt with specific

preliminary objections raised by the respondent prior to the matter being

supported before the Court of Appeal. Given such a context, the Court examined

what constituted a preliminary objection, set out a criterion by which such an

examination could be made and held that those objections which do not fall

within that criterion will not be dealt with at the current stage. After the said

assessment, the Court concluded that out of the four objections raised by the

respondent, only two amounts to preliminary objections and refused to entertain

the former at the current stage.

The counsel for the appellant in the instant matter relies on an observation made

by the Court of Appeal in Sarath Andarahennadi case (supra) wherein the Court

refused to treat one objection as a preliminary objection on the basis that the

CA-PHC- 90-18 Page 3 of 8 25/07/2022 IJ- 32-22

examination of it required a consideration of the merits. The said observation is

as follows:

for example, admittedly the petition at paragraph 13 identifies what are

said to be exceptional circumstances but whether they in fact amount to

exceptional circumstances requires a consideration of the merits of the case.

In my view, it is inappropriate for a court to consider whether exceptional

circumstances exist in a revision application at the stage of notice for if that

is the correct approach the issue of exceptional circumstances ends there.

There is no further matter to be considered at the stage of argument on

exceptional circumstances. At the stage of support, Court need only to

consider whether the petitioner has made out a prima facie case for notice.

The counsel for the appellant also referred to Ingiriya Multi-Purpose Co-operative

Society Ltd v Kalubalage Dona Laitha Srimathi CA/PHC/123/16 CA Minute

dated 17.05.2022, which echoed a similar sentiment.

When the matter is at the support stage, the court is not required to assess

whether the purported exceptional circumstances do in fact amount to an

exceptionality of a nature that warrants the invocation of the revisionary

jurisdiction. That matter must be decided on the merits of the case. In the

instant matter, the petitioner has not patently omitted to aver exceptional

circumstances. Paragraph 28 sets out the exceptional circumstances

averred by the petitioner in the petition. Nevertheless, the impugned order

states that there are exceptional circumstances are not apparent. However,

the learned Magistrate does not refer to the averments of Paragraph 28 of

the petition, nor a determination has been made or reasons given whether

they are in fact exceptional circumstances warranting the invocation of the

revisionary jurisdiction or mere substantial questions of law outside the

revisionary ambit (see Elangakoon v Officer in Charge, Police Station,

Eppawala (2007) 1 SLR 398). The impugned order merely says that

exceptional circumstances are not apparent.

CA-PHC- 90-18 Page 4 of 8 25/07/2022 IJ- 32-22

The commonality in both the Sarath Andarahennadi case (supra) and Ingiriya

case (supra), is that the Court of Appeal was required to assess the respective

applications prior to issuing notices to the respondents. When considering the

impugned orders in the Sarath Andarahennadi case (supra) and the Ingiriya case

(supra), one of the grounds relied upon by the respective High Courts to dismiss

the petitioners applications in revision, was the lack of exceptional

circumstances. In both instances, the Court of Appeal observed that exceptional

circumstances were, in fact, averred in the petitions (Para 28 in the Ingiriya case,

para 13 in the Sarath Andarahennadi case). In both instances, the Court of

Appeal affirmed the thinking that if an application purports exceptional

circumstances, despite them having the likelihood of failing to amount to an

exceptionality in the eyes of the Court when merits are considered at a later stage,

such likelihood alone will not make an application liable to be dismissed in limine.

Hence, an extrapolation of the Sarath Andarahennadi case (supra) and Ingiriya

case (supra) reveals that prior to issuing notices to a respondent, an application

invoking the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court ought to set out exceptional

circumstances in the body of the petition. Whether the averred circumstances

satisfy the threshold expected by the Court should be decided after notices are

issued to the respondents, and both parties are given an opportunity to make

respective submissions.

However, this contention does not impose a blanket ban on the Court against

considering the averred exceptional circumstances at the support stage for the

purpose of issuing notices. Such a blanket ban would essentially limit judicial

discretion endowed within the revisionary jurisdiction. At the support stage, the

Court is required to make an assessment as to whether the resources of the Court

ought to be exhausted by proceeding to the next stage by issuing notice to the

respondents. That determination is at the discretion of the judge and is made by

ascertaining whether the purported exceptional circumstances require further

examination or not. If the Court determines that such an examination is not

warranted, it can dismiss the application in limine, thus preserving the Courts

CA-PHC- 90-18 Page 5 of 8 25/07/2022 IJ- 32-22

resources for a more deserving application. This entire process is an act of judicial

discretion, which falls in line with the revisionary jurisdiction of both the Court

of Appeal and the Provincial High Courts as a petitioner cannot invoke the

revisionary jurisdiction of the Court as of right. A blanket ban from even referring

to the exceptional circumstances at the support stage, on the other hand, would

amount to ousting the said discretion vested with the Court acting in revision.

The Courts can refer to the exceptional circumstances averred during the support

stages to the extent of examining whether a prima facie case has been made

out in the application so as to warrant the issuance of notice on the respondents.

To illustrate this, reference can be made to the bail jurisdiction where

exceptionality is required in certain instances: reference to family conditions is

usually (this may vary depending on the facts of each case) disregarded as

exceptional in drug related cases, so as reference to the implications of the

COVID virus which is a global pandemic common to all. These types of purported

circumstances are prima facie non-exceptional and does not warrant any further

examination.

Especially within the revisionary jurisdiction, which is a discretionary remedy,

it is well within the scope of the presiding judge to make an assessment on the

prima facie exceptionality (or the lack thereof) of the purported circumstances in

order to filter the applications that ought to proceed to the next stage. Hence,

even when a petition purports exceptional circumstances, if the Court is able to

determine at the support stage itself (without having gone into the merits), that

a prima facie case does not exist (thereby rendering an examination of the merits

futile) then, such Court can dismiss the application in limine. This reinforces the

judicial discretion within the ambit of revisionary jurisdiction of the Court.

In the instant case, the role of the High Court judge during the support stage of

the appellants application is to assess whether a prima facie case has been made

out against the Magistrate Court order dated 19.05.2017, showcasing that it

ought to be interfered with by way of a revision. The way such a determination is

made rests with the judicial discretion of the High Court judge, and the Court of

CA-PHC- 90-18 Page 6 of 8 25/07/2022 IJ- 32-22

Appeal will only interfere with the exercise of such discretion if there exists some

miscarriage of justice, irregularity, or illegality that shocks the conscience of the

Court.

Having set out the legal position, it is incumbent upon this Court to assess

whether the learned High Court judge in delivering the impugned order has acted

in excess of what is expected at the support stage of a revision application.

In delivering the impugned order, the learned High Court judge has inquired

whether there exists patent illegality in the order of the Magistrate that shocks

the conscience of the Court, thereby underpinning the principles surrounding

the discretionary remedy that is revision. The impugned order examines the

applicable law (proviso to Section 40 (1) of the Act), ascertaining that the primary

burden on the Magistrate is to determine whether the appellant has satisfactorily

proved that she had taken all precautionary measures to prevent the use of her

vehicle for the commission of a forest offence (Vide Page 18, para 2). The learned

High Court judge identifies the submission upon which the application of revision

pivots and refers to the appellants assertion that she had given verbal

instructions as a precautionary measure (Vide Pages 18 19 of the Brief). In

doing so, the learned High Court judge determines the same to be prima facie

inadequate to the extent that any examination of the merits would be rendered

futile and dismisses the application of the appellant in limine. In the impugned

order, reference has been made to the judgment of Mary Matilda Silva v IP Police

Stattion Habarana CA/PHC/APN/86/87 CA Minute dated 08.09.2010 which has

considered the adequacy of giving verbal instructions alone as means of

dispensing the burden under the proviso to Section 40(1) of the Act, and the

learned High Court judge has drawn a parallel to the facts of the instant case

where no indication prevails as to measures taken other than or in support of the

verbal instructions the appellant has purported to give. (The learned High Court

judge has also distinguished the instant case from Abubackerge Jaleel v OIC

Anuradhapura and Another CA/PHC/108/2010 CA Minute 26.08.2014).

CA-PHC- 90-18 Page 7 of 8 25/07/2022 IJ- 32-22

Hence, the learned High Court judge has focused on the primary burden cast

upon the appellant under the Act, a fact upon which the entire revision

application pivots, and has assessed the measures taken by the appellant in

dispensing such a burden as prima facie inadequate. This determination of the

learned High Court judge has led to the conclusion that it is futile to proceed to

an examination of the merits of the case and has dismissed the appellants

application in limine. The appellant has failed to satisfy the learned High Court

judge that there exist any prima facie irregularity, illegality or impropriety in the

Magistrate Court order dated 19.05.2017 which needs further examination.

Hence, it is clear that the High Court judge has not been alerted to any glittering

circumstances which shock the conscience of the Court. Therefore, the learned

High Court judge has used his discretion and has dismissed the appellants

application in limine. We do not see the said determination by the learned High

Court judge as acting outside his role during the support stage. It is well within

the scope of his discretion to dismiss the application in limine, when there is no

prima facie case to intervene with the Magistrates order.

At this juncture, it is pertinent to refer to the Magistrate Court order dated

19.05.2017 that was sought to be canvassed before the High Court. The appellant

has given contradictory position where evidence revealed that she was aware of

the loading of timber on to her vehicle without a valid permit, but claimed she

was unaware that such act was illegal. (Vide page 48 and 62 of the Brief). While

reinforcing the maxim Ignorantia juris non excusat (ignorance of the law is no

excuse), it is the view of this Court that the proceedings in the vehicle inquiry

also points to the lack of a prima facie case in seeking to revise the order of the

Magistrate dated 19.05.2017.

In consideration of all the above facts within the context of wide judicial discretion

vested with the Court in exercising its revisionary jurisdiction (see Weerasinghe

Arachchilage Deepa Nandani v Officer in Charge, Police Station Marawila

CA/PHC/APN/134/20 CA Minute dated 20.07.2021), it is the view of this Court

that the impugned order has dismissed the appellants revision application for

CA-PHC- 90-18 Page 8 of 8 25/07/2022 IJ- 32-22

the lack of a prima facie case and has rightfully recorded reasons for such

dismissal. The impugned order is not erroneous or irregular in its determination

and we see no reason to interfere with it.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Menaka Wijesundera J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL