IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Case No. 1105/1996 (F)

D.C. Kegalle Case No. 2263/P

l. Wickrama Arachchilage Ran Menika

2. Atukoralage Punchi Banda

3. Atukoralage Dingiri Banda

4. Atukoralage Podimenika

All of Asideniya

PLAINTIFFS

~Vs~

l. Kasturi Aratchillage Piyadasa

2. Atukoralage Podihamy

Both of Asideniya

3. Rev. Saranankara, Dematapitiya

4. Dolawatta Appuhamilage Piyadasa

5. Kasturi Aratchillage Tikiri Banda

6. Kasturi Aratchillage Mudiyanse

7. Kasturi Aratchillage Herat Banda

DEFENDANTS

AND

/

Kasturi Aratchillage Piyadasa (Deceased)

IstDEFENDANT ~APPELLANT

Kasturi Aratchillage Podiralahamy

of "Kasturi Stores",

1

ill

Dambtanpitiya, Hakahinna.

IA DEFENDANT ,APPELLANT

1. Wickrama Arachchilage Ran Menika

2. Atukoralage Punchi Banda

3. Atukoralage Dingiri Banda

4. Atukoralage Podimenika (Deceased)

All of Asideniya

PLAINTIFFS, RESPONDENTS

AND NOW

Kasturi Aratchillage Podiralahamy

of "Kasturi Stores" ,

Dambtanpitiya, Hakahinna.

IA DEFENDANT ,APPELLANT

1. Wickrama Arachchilage Ran Menika

2. Atukoralage Punchi Banda

3. Atukoralage Dingiri Banda

All of Asideniya

PLAINTIFFS, RESPONDENT ,RESPONDENTS

4a. Wickrama Arachchilage Ramanayake

4b. Wickrama Arachchilage Chandra Hathurusighe

2

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Decided on

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

4c. Wickrama Arachchilage Seelawtahie

All of "Kandegedara", Haloluwa,

Hettimulla, Kegalle.

4d. Wickrama Arachchilage Dingiri Menike

No. 198, Ambulugala,

Mawanella.

Substituted 4th PLAINTIFF~RESPONDENTS

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,j.

Amrith Rajapakse for the lA Defendant~ Appellant

Mahinda Nanayakkara with Aruna Jayatilaka for the 3rd Plaintiff~Respondent

22.06.2018

lOhen this matter came up in this Court for argument, a preliminary objection was taken

up on behalf of the 3rd Plaintiff~ Respondent, to wit

(a) the 2nd Defendant has not been made a party in the notice of appeal;

(b) the 2nd Defendant has not been made a party in the petition of appeal;

(c) thus there is no properly constituted appeal before this Court;

(d) hence the 1st Defendant~Appellant has not invoked the appellate jurisdiction of

this Court;

(e) in the circumstances the appeal of the 1st Defendant~Appellant should stand

dismissed.

3

When the 2nd Defendant passed away, his brother was substituted and he became the

substituted 2A Defendant. In the judgment he was allotted 1/48th share.

"2er ~Ol;C)-~@ 2 e:>eD ~05oo0~eD er~tl)b@O)@~ O)6)t5)>C) ~eD

1/48 tl)C)eo 2er ~OOOl;C) ~ex., ~'-'." -see page 9 of the judgment or page 121

of the appeal brief.

Thus the argument has been made that as the substituted 2A Defendant is a necessary

party to the appeal he should have been made a party respondent.

Section 755(1) of the Civil Procedure Code (CPC) that deals with the filing of a notice of

appeal goes as follows:~

"Every notice of appeal shall be distinctly written on good and suitable paper and

shall be signed by the appellant or his registered attorney and shall be duly

stamped. Such notice shall also contain the following particulars:

a) the name of the court from which the appeal is preferred;

b) the number of the action;

c) the names and addresses of the parties to the action;

d) the names of the appellant and respondent;

e) the nature of the relief claimed"

In light of this provision, it was contended that the notice of appeal filed by the rt

Defendant~Appellant was void and it has not effect in law whatsoever.

Section 758(1) of the Civil Procedure Code which deals with a petition of appeal states

as follows:~

"The petition of appeal shall be distinctly written upon good and suitable paper,

and shall contain the following particulars:

a) the name of the court in which the case is pending;

b) the names of the parties to the action;

c) the names of the appellant and of the respondent;

4

d) the address to the Court of Appeal;

e) a plain and concise statement of the grounds of objection to the judgment,

decree, or order appealed against~ such statement to be set forth in duly

numbered paragraphs;

f) a demand of the form of relief claimed"

The complaint of the Counsel for the 3rd Plaintiff~Respondent is that that 1st Defendant~

Appellant has not made the 2nd Defendant a party even in the petition of appeal.

In the circumstances, it was submitted that the rt Defendant~Appellant violated the

mandatory provisions of Section 755(1) and 758(1) of the Civil Procedure Code.

A chronology of events would bring out the following facts. The proxy of the 2nd

Defendant had indeed been filed by Attomey~at~Law Mr. A.LM. Yusuf and a subsequent

Journal Entry bearing No. 51 states that the 2nd Defendant had passed away and steps

must be taken.

On 15.09.1989, an application had been made to substitute the brother of the 2nd

Defendant in his room. Thus Atukoralage Ranbanda became the substituted 2nd

Defendant (2A Defendant) and continued to be present in Court. But no statement of

claim had been filed on behalf of 2nd Defendant or his substituted Defendant.

As I reproduced the relevant portion of the judgment, the learned District Judge in his

judgment dated 02.04.1996 has allotted 1I48th share of the subject~matter to the

substituted 2A Defendant. The Counsel for the 3rd Plaintiff~Respondent submitted that

the 1st Defendant~Appellant had not complied with the mandatory provisions of the Civil

Procedure Code in not naming the substituted 2A Defendant as a party respondent.

Neither in the notice of appeal nor in the petition of appeal has the substituted 2A

Defendant been made a party.

In these circumstances should the 1st Defendant~Appellant be visited with the sanction

of dismissal of his petition of appeal? In this case, there were 4 Plaintiffs and 7

Defendants. In the notice of appeal of the 1st Defendant~Appellant, only the Plaintiffs

5

have been named as Respondents. The 2nd to the th Defendants have been omitted. This

seems to be the case in the petition of appeal as well. Upon a perusal of the proceedings

in the court a quo, I find that just like the 2nd Defendant, the 5th, 6th and th Defendants

had not filed any statements of claim. Even the 4th Defendant did not file a statement of

claim. It would appear that the 5th, 6th and th Defendants who had been omitted were

also the siblings of the 1st Defendant~Appellant. However, these Defendants were not

allotted any shares.

It is axiomatic that if the 1st Defendant~Appellant succeeds, it is bound to impact on the

rights of the 2nd Defendant who has been allotted a share. There is a likelihood that the

rights of the 2nd Defendant may be reduced in the event of the success of the tt

Defendant~ Appellant's appeal. To the extent of an omission to cite the 2nd Defendant in

the petition of appeal, there is a mistake, omission or defect on the part of the tt

Defendant~ Appellant.

I took the opportunity to observe in CA 696/1997 (CA minutes of 27.01.2017) that

remissness on the part of a draftsman of a petition of appeal in not naming some of the

Defendants as Respondents could not result in an automatic dismissal of the appeal. The

guiding principle is clearly given in Section 759(2) of the Civil Procedure Code in the

following tenor: ~

"In the case of any mistake, omission or defect on the part of any in complying with the provisions

of the foregoing sections, (other than a provision specifying the period within which any act or

thing is to be done), the Court of Appeal may, if it should be of opinion that the respondent has not

been materially prejudiced, grant relief on such terms as it may deem just."

When Section 759(2) of the CPC alludes to "the provisions of the foregOing sections",

Section 758(1)( c) of the CPC which requires the names of the Appellant and Respondent

to be set out in the petition of appeal falls within Section 759(2) but the curative

provision Section 759(2) spells out the power of the Court of the Appeal to grant relief

on such terms as it may deem just in the event there is a non compliance with a foregoing

provision such as Section 758(1) (c) of the cpc. The discretion vested in the Court of

6

Appeal has to be exercised subject to a guiding principle namely the Respondents should

not have been materially prejudiced.

This curative provision 759(2) of the CPC has to be read with Section 770 of the cpc.

But Section 770, whilst conferring a discretion on the Court of Appeal to implead as

Respondents the parties necessary for the appeal but who had not been joined, does not

spell out a guiding principle as to how and in what manner that discretion should be

exercised. As a result one has to look to case law to ascertain the remit of the discretion

that our Courts have imposed.

Section 770 of the CPC

Section 770 of the Civil Procedure Code states that, 'If, at the hearing of the appeal, the

Respondent is not present and the Court is not satisfied upon the material in the record

or upon other evidence that the notice of appeal was duly served upon him or his

registered Attorney as hereinbefore provided, or if it appears to the Court at such hearing that

any person who was a party to the action in the court against whose decree the appeal is made, but who

has not been made a party to the appeal, the court may issue the requisite notice of appeal for service.'

Thus there is a statutory discretion to implead a party and serve notice on him even at

the stage of the appellate hearing. As to how and on what criteria the discretion to add as

Respondents necessary parties out of those who participated in the District Court, there

have been divergent observations.

The Full Court in Dias v. Arnolis, 17 N.L.R. 200 decided that the Appeal Court could act

under Section 770 of the Civil Procedure Code, and that it was a question for the decision

of a Judge who heard the appeal whether or not a Respondent ought to be added in any

particular case. It was held that it was competent to the Supreme Court to order that any

party to an action who had not been made a party to the appeal, but who was interested

in the result of the appeal, must be made a respondent to the appeal.

In another Full Bench decision of the then Supreme Court Ibrahim v. Beebee (1916) 19

N.L.R. 285 it was held that it was necessary, for the proper constitution of an appeal,

that all parties to an action who may be prejudicially affected by the result of the appeal

7

should be made parties, and, unless they were, the petition of appeal should be rejected.

An appeal defective owing to non-joinder of necessary Respondents can be remedied in a

proper case by an order of Court under Section 770 of the Code directing those parties to

be added or noticed

In fact the Supreme Court Appeal (Special Provisions) Act No.4 of 1960 was possibly

enacted to give recognition to the above principles adumbrated in Dias v. Amolis (supra)

and Ibrahim v. Beebee (supra). More particularly Section 4(1) of this Act enacts as

follows:-

(1) Subject to the provisions of subsection (2), where an appeal referred to in Section

2 or Section 3, has been presented to the Court of first instance, or the appropriate

authority, as the case may be, within the time prescribed by any written law

relating to such appeal, the Supreme Court shall not exercise the powers vested in

such Court by any written law to reject or dismiss that appeal on the ground only

of any error, omission or default on the part of the appellant in complying with the

provisions of any written law relating to such appeal, unless material prejudice has

been caused thereby to the respondent to such appeal.

(2)The Supreme Court shall, in the case of any appeal referred to in subsection 1,

which is not rejected or dismissed by such Court direct the appellant to comply

with such directions as the Court may deem necessary for the purpose of

rectifying, supplying or making good any error, omission or defect so referred to

within such time and upon such conditions as may be specified in such directions,

and shall reject or dismiss that appeal if the appellant fails to comply with such

directions.

(3)In this section, the expression "appellant", in relation to any appeal under any

written law, includes any agent of the appellant who is authorized by that law to

make such appeal or to represent the appellant at the appeal.

A careful perusal of Section 4 of the Supreme Court Appeal (Special Provisions) Act No.

4 of 1960 would reveal that the letter and spirit of both Sections 759(2) and 770 of the

8

current CPC are reflected in the 1960 legislation. It is worth noting that Section 759(2) of

the current CPC did not have a corresponding counterpart in the old CPC and I would

opine that Section 4 of the Supreme Court Appeal (Special Provisions) Act No.4 of 1960

could be regarded as the precursor to Section 759(2) of the current Cpe.

Whilst Section 4 postulates no dismissal of the petition of appeal unless there has been

material prejudice caused to the Respondent, the section prescribes latitude to Court to

remit the petition of appeal for rectification of errors within prescribed time and

specified directions. Only when there was a failure to comply with such directions, the

non-compliance eventuated in a dismissal or rejection of the petition of appeal.

It was possibly in the aftermath of the liberality of this legislation that the case of Kiri

Mudiyanse v. Bandara Menika, (1972) 76 N.LR. 371 was decided but this case did not

allude to Supreme Court Appeal (Special Provisions) Act No.4 of 1960 but rather relied

heavily on Section 770 of the old Civil Procedure Code. The case also considered both

Dias v. Arnolls (supra) and Ibrahim v. Beebee (supra). Pathirana, J. (with Rajaratnam, J.)

held that the Supreme Court had the discretionary power under Section 770 of the old

Civil Procedure Code to direct the 1st to 3rd and the 6th to the 8th Defendants to be added

as Respondents. The exercise of the discretion contemplated in Section 770 of the old

CPC was a matter for the decision of the Judge who heard the appeal in the particular

case. Furthermore, it should be exercised when some good reason or cause was given for

the non-joinder. The discretion which was an unfettered one must, of course, be

exercised judicially and not arbitrarily and capriciously.

In fact Pathirana, J. (with Rajaratnam, J. agreeing) stated that intrinsically there is

nothing in Section 770 either expressly or by necessary implication to inhibit the

discretion to the principles that have been set out in the case of Ibrahim v. Beebee as to

do so will be tantamount to saying that the exercise of the discretion is cribbed, cabined

and confined exclusively to these principles, limiting the exercise of the discretion in a

particular way, and thereby putting an end to the discretion itself. Pathirana, J. quoted

9

the observations made by Lord Wright in Evans v. Bartlam (1937) 2 A.E.R. 646, at 655;

(1937) AC 473 at 488:~

"To quote again from Bowen LJ. in Gardner v. Jay (1885) 29 ChD 50: 'When a tribunal is

invested by Act of Parliament or by Rules with a discretion, without any indication in the Act or

Rules of the grounds upon which the discretion is to be exercised, it is a mistake to lay down any

rules with a view of indicating the particular grooves in which the discretion should run, for if the

Act or the Rules did not fetter the discretion of the Judge why should the Court do so?"

In fact Section 770 of the Old Civil Procedure Code went as follows:~

"If it appears to the Court at such hearing that any person who was a party to the action in the

Court against whose decree the appeal is made, but who has not been made a party to the appeal, is

interested in the result of the appea~ the Court may adjourn the hearing to a future day, to be fixed

by the Court, and direct that such person be made a respondent, and may issue the requisite notices

of appeal to the Fiscal for service."

Pathirana, J. held that Section 770, in his view, gave a very wide discretion to Court and

there was room for introducing other principles by which the Court could exercise its

discretion.

These observations will equally hold true for Section 770 of the current Civil Procedure

Code which enacts a wide discretion, but does not prescribe any particular guideline.

The criteria to be adopted to exercise the discretion in Section 770 will depend on facts

and circumstances of each case and, the previous cases, which upheld preliminary

objections based on non~joinder of the original Defendants or substituted Defendants as

Respondents to petitions of appeal, cannot be applied across the board to reject a

petition of appeal which, in the opinion of Court, requires rectification by way of an

amendment.

In the facts and circumstances of this case before me, there is no allegation that the

Plaintiff~Respondents have been materially prejudiced by the non~joinder of the 2nd

Defendant in the case. No material has been placed to substantiate any allegation of

10

material prejudice. In the absence of such material prejudice as postulated in Section

759(2) of the Civil Procedure Code, nothing would inhibit this Court to permit an

amendment of the petition of appeal.

Moreover Section 770 too would permit such a course to be adopted as the decree

appealed against is one that was made in rem and it is pertinent to observe that the 2nd

Defendant, though he did not participate at the trial, needs to be noticed of the appeal

subject to any objections that the 1st Defendant-Appellant may take as to his

participation in the appeal. It has to be noted that apart from having filed a proxy, the 2nd

Defendant never participated at the trial and it is inequitable to precipitate a dismissal of

the petition of appeal merely on the ground that the non-participating 2nd or 2A

Defendant was not impleaded in the petition of appeal. Maybe the draftsman of the

petition of appeal, albeit erroneously, thought that a non-participating 2A Defendant,

notwithstanding the allotment of shares, was not a necessary party as oftentimes their

participation qua an Appellant is objected to-see Dheeraratne, J. in Mendis v. Dublin de

SUva and two others (l990) 2 Sri L.R. 249:-

"I find it difficult to subscribe to the proposition advanced on behalf of the appellant, that a

defaulting party who is disentitled to raise a contest on a dispute as a matter of right at the trial,

acquires such a right once trial is concluded."

Dheeraratne, J. observed in this case that a party who did not file a statement of claim at

the trial could not prefer even an appeal. I had occasion to refer to this case in the

context of an aggrieved party in CA 853/1999 (F)-DC Avissawella 10624/P (CA minutes

of 08.06.2016).

I would not interpose these observations in a case such as this where a non participating

Defendant has to become a Respondent and in order to ensure due process I would

countenance the filing of an amended petition of appeal even at this belated stage.

I am also fortified by two precedents from the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court

which also impel me to permit the amendment of the petition of appeal to add the

substituted 2A Defendant.

11

In Anura Senanayake and others v. Mudiyanse Senanayake and others (2012) B.LR

Bar Association Law]ournal Vol. XIX, Part II, p 348 a preliminary objection had been

raised in the Court of Appeal on behalf of the Plaintiff~Respondent in the case that the

petition of appeal did not include the names of parties as required in Section 758(1)(b)

and Section 758(1)( c) of the Civil Procedure Code. The parties who were allotted shares

in the original Court were not made parties to the Appeal

The Court of Appeal held: ~

(a) The Appellate Court has a discretion to either reject the Petition of Appeal or

permit the Appellant to file an amended Petition of Appeal, provided the

Respondents have not been materially prejudiced.

(b) Those who were allotted shares in a partition suit and also the parties who were

parties in the Original Court should be made parties in terms of Section 758(1)(b)

of the Civil Procedure Code.

( c) The present Civil Procedure Code on grounds of rejection of the Petition of Appeal

is somewhat liberal in its approach when compared with the earlier Civil

Procedure Code. (Section 759(2) in the present Code was not found in the earlier

Code. All in all this seems to be a curable defect).

His Lordship Justice Priyasath Dep, PCI] (as His Lordship then was) quite percipiently

held in Heenmenike v. Mangala Malkanthi (2016) B.LR 110 that the failure to comply

with Section 755(1) by not citing the 2nd substituted Plaintiff as a Respondent in the

notice of appeal and in the petition of appeal is a curable defect under Section 759(2) and

Section 770 of the CPC. His Lordship Priyasath Dep, PCI] (as His Lordship then was)

drew in aid among a host of judicial precedents the decision of the Supreme Court in

Nanayakkara v. Warnakulasuriya (1993) 2 Sri LR. 289 wherein Kulatunga,J. had held>

"The power of the Court to grant relief under section 759(2) of the Code is wide and discretionary

and subject to such terms as the Court may deem just. Relief may be granted even if no excuse for

non~compliance is forthcoming. However, relief cannot be granted if the Court is of opinion that

the respondent has been materially prejudiced in which event the appeal has to be dismissed."

12

,

In the course of the judgment, His Lordship also cited Keerthisiri v. Weerasena (1997) 1

Sri.LR 70 (G.P.S.de Silva CJ) and Jayasekera v. Lakmini and Others (2010) 1 Sri L.R. 41.

In the circumstances, I take the view that the failure to add the 2nd Defendant as a party

to the notice of appeal and the petition of appeal is not a fatal irregularity and hence I

hold that the discretion of this Court must be exercised to permit an amendment. I allow

the 1A Defendant-Appellant to file an amended petition of appeal incorporating the

parties in the District Court who have not been named as Respondents. Once the

amended petition of appeal is filed, the Registrar is directed to serve notices on the added

Respondents. Thereafter this Court will proceed to hear the appeal on the merits.

I order the 1st Defendant-Appellant to pay the Plaintiff-Respondents a sum of Rs. 7,000/-

each. All other parties and Respondents who were allotted shares by the learned District

Judge must be paid a sum of Rs. 4,000/- each. The costs ordered have to be depOsited in

the registry after the amended petition of appeal has been filed and they have to be

defrayed to the parties before argument takes place. The order for costs has to be

mandatorily complied with.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Preliminary objection overruled.

13