==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/117-118/2023

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal Case No. Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

CA/HCC/0117-118/2023 Lanka

High Court of Balapitiya

Case No. Cri/1131/2008 COMPLAINANT

Vs.

1. Thuiah Handi Manoj Hasintha 2. Sangama Chanaka Jayawardena

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Thuiah Handi Manoj Hasintha 2. Sangama Chanaka Jayawardena

ACCUSED-APPELLANTS

Vs.

CA/HCC/117-118/2023

2 | P a g e

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Harshana Ananda for the Appellant.

Dishna Warnakula, DSG for the

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 23/02/2026

DECIDED ON : 02/07/2026

*******************

CA/HCC/117-118/2023

3 | P a g e

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam. J,

The above-named Accused-Appellants (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellants) were indicted for committing the murder of

Dadumathumullagamage Lishan Maduranga on 23.09.2005 which is an

offence punishable under Section 296 of the Penal Code.

After a non-jury trial, the Learned High Court Judge has found the

Appellants guilty of the charge and sentenced them to death on 03/03/2023.

The prosecution had called seven witnesses and marked productions at the

trial. As the Appellants were tried in absentia the defence called three

witnesses on behalf of them and closed their case.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellants

preferred this appeal to this court.

At the hearing of this appeal, only the 2nd Appellant was represented by a

Counsel. The appeal of the 1st Appellant was not argued.

History of the case

When this case was called on 18.11.2008 for service of indictment, only the

1st Appellant was present and indictment was only served to him and the

plea was recorded. The Appellant pleaded not guilty to the charge and elected

a non-jury trial.

While the prosecution was preparing to lead evidence under Section 241(1)

of the Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 (Hereinafter referred to as the

CA/HCC/117-118/2023

4 | P a g e

CPC) in respect of the 2nd Appellant, the 1st Appellant also absconded court.

Hence, court ordered the prosecution to take steps under Section 241(1) of

the CPC.

On 24.04.2013 the 2nd Appellant was produced to court and was remanded

by the Learned High Court Judge. 241(1) inquiry was held in respect of the

1st Appellant and the case was fixed in absentia of him. On 01.03.2016, the

Learned High Court Judge had commenced the trial stating that the

indictments had been served on the Appellants and explained the right of a

jury trial. The relevant portion of the proceeding is re-produced below:

Page 197 of the brief.

pQos;hska yg wêfpdaokd lshjd oS" wêfpdaokd m;% Ndr oS we;s w;r" cQrs iNdjla bosrsfha

úNd.hg .ekSug we;s whs;sh o myod oS we;'

ta wkqj kvqj úNd.hg kshñ; j we;'

The Appellants had been properly represented by their Counsel during the

trial, even though the trial proceeded against them in absentia. At the

hearing of this appeal, the 1st Appellant was not represented by a Counsel.

Only the Counsel for the 2nd Appellant argued the matter confining his

argument only in respect of the 2nd Appellant. No argument was placed on

behalf of the 1st Appellant.

An appellate court cannot merely dismiss a criminal appeal in situations

where there is lack of prosecution or where the appellant fails to pursue it.

Considering the liberty and legal rights that are at stake, the Court would

legally be required assess the trial court’s record and decide the case based

on its merits. As such, it cannot merely be dismissed based on the absence

or inactivity of the appellant.

Therefore, this Court has a bounden duty to consider the 1st Appellant’s case.

Hence, I will consider the Appeal of the 1st Appellant first.

CA/HCC/117-118/2023

5 | P a g e

The 1st Appellant had preferred the following grounds of Appeal in the

Petition of Appeal. The grounds are re-produced below:

1. The judgment of the Learned High Court Judge is illegal and contrary

to the law.

2. The contradictions and omissions marked in the prosecution case were

not taken into consideration when analysing the evidence.

3. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to properly analyse the

defence evidence.

4. Due consideration was not given to the fact that the prosecution has

failed to prove their case beyond a reasonable doubt.

5. The evidence tendered throughout the case was not analysed by the

Learned High Court Judge with a judicial mind.

6. The evidence tendered in favour of the defence has been ignored by the

Learned High Court Judge in arriving at his judgment.

7. The judgement of the Learned High Court Judge has failed to give due

consideration to the fact that the indictment was not served to the 2nd

accused at the beginning of the trial.

8. Even though the Learned High Court Judge had accepted the fact that

he has not satisfied with how the trial has been conducted, he has

ignored that fact and given his judgement.

9. The prosecution has failed to call any investigation officer or police

officer as a witness to their case and the Learned High Court Judge

has failed to go through the contradictions marked in the testimony of

the only police officer called by the prosecution, with a judicial mind.

10. Due weightage was not given to the defence of alibi taken by the

Accused-Appellants from the beginning of the trial, when analysing the

defence evidence.

11. When there were certain defects identified in the post mortem

report and the defence witness No. 3 has been able to create a

reasonable doubt in the testimony of PW7, the Learned High Court

Judge has failed to analyse those facts with a judicial mind.

CA/HCC/117-118/2023

6 | P a g e

The 2nd Appellant has raised the following grounds of appeal in support

his argument:

1. The Learned High Court Judge erred in law by failing to appreciate

that fact that the indictment not being read over and jury option was

not given to the 2nd Appellant have caused a grave miscarriage of

justice in respect of the 2nd Appellant.

2. 2nd Appellant has not been afforded a fair trial.

3. Learned High Court Judge erred in law holding that the prosecution

has proved the case beyond reasonable doubt.

4. The Learned High Court judge has unreasonably rejected the

contradictions marked by the defence.

Background of the Case

According to PW1 Amarasiri, the father of the deceased, the deceased had

gone to the ‘Paraliya’ play ground to play cricket. About half an hour after

his departure, he had received a phone call from PW2, saying that his son

had been shot and he had rushed to the playground. He had lodged the first

complaint with the Meetiyagoda Police Station.

PW4 Maduranga had seen the incident when walking towards the “Paraliya”

ground from the Paraliya junction. The Appellants had arrived at the scene

in a bicycle ridden by the 1st Appellant. The 2nd Appellant who was sitting on

the front bar, had alighted from the bicycle, and had gone up to the deceased

who was fielding near the boundary line. He had opened fire twice and

threatened the others not to give evidence, and both Appellants had ridden

the bicycle away from the scene.

PW2, Manohara, too said that while playing cricket, the 2nd Appellant had

come with the 1st Appellant and had shot the deceased to death.

According to PW7 the JMO had observed four injuries on the deceased’s

body. The fatal injury was observed on the left side of the head. The 3rd injury

was on the left upper arm and the 2nd injury was the corresponding exit

CA/HCC/117-118/2023

7 | P a g e

wound of 3rd. The cause of death was severe brain injuries due to discharge

of a firearm (Lacerated left cerebellar lobe and left temporal of the brain).

PW10, PS 29245 Livera gave evidence with regard to the investigation.

As the Learned High Court called the defence, the Appellants called three

witnesses. The first two witnesses, including DW01 Sumathirathne, testified

that the Appellants were engaged in roofing the house of the 1st Appellant.

Defence witness Professor Perera (DW04) testified that the fact that no

burning, blackening, or tattooing around the wounds indicate that the shots

may have been fired at a distance of about 04-05 feet. Further, he opined

that there could be tears on the upper cloth if the deceased had worn

anything at the time of shooting.

As the Appeal grounds raised on behalf of the 1st Appellant are

interconnected, all grounds will be considered together hereinafter.

PW2 and PW4 are eye witnesses to the incident. They had witnessed the

incident while they were playing cricket along with the deceased. Both had

very clearly seen the incident and identified the Appellants perfectly.

In a criminal case, two eyewitnesses being available would greatly strengthen

the prosecution’s case, which can be done through the corroboration of

timelines and identification of suspects. In such cases, judges and juries

would be compelled by such direct eyewitness testimony. As such, two

witnesses that agree on the same details would usually secure higher

conviction judgments, as opposed to cases with merely one single witness.

In the case of Kumara de Silva & Others V Attorney General (2010) 2 Sri

L.R. 169, it was held that;

"Credibility is a question of fact, not of law. Appeal Court Judges

repeatedly stress the importance of the trial judge's observations of the

demeanour of witnesses in deciding questions of fact. The acceptance or

rejection of evidence of witnesses is therefore a question of fact for the trial

CA/HCC/117-118/2023

8 | P a g e

Judge, since he or she is in the best position to hear and observe

witnesses. In such a situation the Appellate courts will be slow to interfere

with the findings of the trial Judge unless such evidence could be shown

to be totally inconsistent or perverse and lacking credibility."

In Ariyadasa v Attorney-General, (2012) 1 Sri. L.R. 84], Sisira de Abrew, J

held:

“Court of Appeal will not lightly disturb a finding of a trial Judge with

regard to the acceptance or rejection of a testimony of a witness, unless

it is manifestly wrong, when the trial judge has taken such a decision

after observing the demeanour and the deportment of a witness. This is

because the trial Judge has the priceless advantage to observe the

demeanour and deportment of the witness which the Court of Appeal

does not have.”

This position was analysed in the case of Veerasamy Sivathasan v.

Honourable Attorney General [2021] 2 SLR 290 (SC Appeal 208/2012) as

follows:

“One key reason for the afore-stated approach is that the trial court has

the invaluable advantage of observing the demeanour and deportment of

witnesses who testify at the trial, and using such observations for the

purpose of assessing and determining the credibility of witnesses.

Furthermore, the gradual and incremental unfolding of human testimony

and other evidence during the course of a trial, and the ability of the trial

judge to question witnesses and obtain clarifications, place the trial judge

in an advantageous position in appreciating the evidence and the

respective positions of the prosecution and the defence. These advantages

are not available to an appellate Court, which is called upon to determine

the lawfulness of the finding of the trial Court, based on a consideration of

the verbatim transcript of the trial proceedings together with the judgment

CA/HCC/117-118/2023

9 | P a g e

of the trial judge, aided by submissions of counsel and the reasons for the

findings contained in the judgment.”

As per the evidence given by PW2 and PW4, it has clearly been established

that the Appellants acted together to commit the murder of the deceased by

shooting. In order to establish common intention, it is necessary to prove a

shared meeting of minds, where mere accidental presence or independent

actions would not suffice. Courts would infer this by considering the

circumstantial and direct evidence available.

In this case the witnesses clearly outlined how the Appellants arrived at the

scene of crime with coordination and possession of a coordinated weapon.

After shooting the deceased, it is evident that the Appellants had left the

place after threatening not to give evidence to the people who were there at

that time. This clearly shows their participatory presence.

In SC Appeal 130/2014 dated 14.09.2022 Kodagoda, J. held that:

Therefore, it needs to be recognised that the principle of ‘common intention’

is a means by which criminal liability is (a) shared between co-participants

in the commission of the crime on the basis of their having shared a

common intention, and committed certain actions in furtherance of such

common intention, or (b) extended to a person who may not be the principal

offender responsible directly for commission of the offence, on the basis of

such other person having entertained a common intention together with the

principal offender and such other person having acted in furtherance of the

common intention with the principal offender. The same concept would

apply to similar situations involving more than two persons.

In Gunasiri and others v Republic [2009] 1 SLR 39 it was held that:

“To establish the existence of common intention it is not essential to

prove that the criminal act was done pursuant to a pre-arranged plan.

CA/HCC/117-118/2023

10 | P a g e

A common intention can come into existence without a prearrangement.

It can be formed on the spur of the movement.”

In the case of The Queen v Vincent Fernando and two others (1963) 65

NLR 265, (at p. 272) it was held that:

“a person who merely shares the criminal intention or takes a fiendish

delight in what is happening but does no criminal act in furtherance of the

common intention of all is not liable for the acts of the others. To be liable

under section 32 a mental sharing of the common intention is not sufficient,

the sharing must be evidenced by a criminal act.

… where a series of criminal acts is done by several persons, each act

would be done either jointly or severally. But whether the criminal acts in

the series of criminal acts are done jointly or severally if each criminal act

is done in furtherance of the common intention of all each of the persons

sharing the common intention and doing any act in the series of criminal

acts is not only liable for his own act but is also liable for the acts of the

others in the same manner as if it were done by him alone.”

The Learned High Court Judge had very correctly analysed the evidence

presented by the prosecution and held that this is a premeditated murder

considering the participation of the Appellants in committing the murder of

the deceased.

The defence witnesses are the uncle and the mother of the 1st Appellant and

the Learned High Court Judge had considered their evidence and given

reasons as to why he disregarded their evidence.

In this case, the Appellant was properly arraigned, the indictment was read

out and jury option was given to him. He had chosen that his case be tried

before a judge. He was properly represented unto filing his Petition of Appeal.

Hence, no prejudice has been caused to him even though he was tried in

absentia due to his continuous absence in Court.

CA/HCC/117-118/2023

11 | P a g e

In this case, PW2 and PW4 had clearly witnessed the incident and described

how the murder was committed by the Appellants. They had given cogent

and convincing evidence.

Considering the evidence given by PW2 and PW4, and other witnesses,

finding the Appellants guilty of the charge has not caused any prejudice to

the Appellants. Therefore, I affirm the conviction in respect of the 1st

Appellant and dismiss his appeal.

In respect of the second Appellant the Learned Counsel strenuously

contended that his client was deprived of a fair trial. His argument was that

the 2nd Appellant was not properly arraigned in this case. The charge was

not read to him and jury option was not given. The Learned High Court Judge

too admitted but he failed to take preventive measures before he could

pronounce the judgment. Instead, he had commented in his judgement. The

relevant portion is re-produced below:

Page 522 of the brief.

2016.03.01 jk osk fuu kvqfõ kvq úNd.h wdrïN ù we;s w;r" fuu kvqfõ kvq

úNd.h uydêlrK úksiqre kdu,a nKavdr n<,af,a ue;s;=ud bosrsmsg oS wdrïN ù we;s

w;r" ta wkqj m,uq pQos; fkdue;sj o fojk pQos; bosrsmsg oS o" kvq úNd.h wdrïN ù we;'

tu kvq úNd.hg wdrïN lrk wjia:dfõ oS my; i`oyka igyk 2016.03.01 jk osk

;nd we;' —pQos;hska yg wêfpdaokd lshjd oS wêfpdaokd m;% Ndr oS we;s w;r" cQrs iNdjla

bosrsfha úNd.hg .ekSug we;s whs;sh o myod oS we;'˜ flfia jQjo fuu kvq jd¾;dj

mrSlaId lsrSfï oS fuu kvqfõ fofjks pQos;g lsisÿ wjia:djl wêfpdaokd Ndr oS fkdue;s

nj;a" tfiau fojk pQos;g cQrS iNdjla iys;j fyda rys;j ;u kvq úNd.h meje;aùug

we;s whs;sjdislu meyeos,s lr oS fkdue;s nj;a" tfiau fofjk pQos;g wêfpdaokd m;%fha

we;s wêfpdaokdj lshjd f;areï lr oS fkdue;s nj;a fmkS hhs'

As correctly argued, the Learned High Court Judge has tried to justify this

lapse on the basis that the second Appellant was represented by a Counsel

CA/HCC/117-118/2023

12 | P a g e

In criminal trials, a charge refers to the formal, written accusation by the

government stating that the individual has committed a specific crime. A

charge would serve as the foundation of the legal proceedings that follow,

and therefore would serve as the blueprint which determines factors such as

the relevance of evidence, what must be proven by the prosecution and the

defendant’s rights.

As such, if a criminal trial is concluded with a judgment being delivered,

where the accused was never read or explained the charges, such a judgment

or conviction would be invalid. The rationale for this is that failure to formally

read the charges would violate fundamental legal rights and lead to a

miscarriage of justice.

In Sri Lanka’s criminal courts, trial by jury is an option which is primarily

available for the most serious crimes heard in the High Court. As per the

Judicature Act, an accused would have the right to elect whether to be tried

by a jury or by a judge sitting alone.

In Attorney General v Segulebbe Latheef and Another [2008] 1 SLR 225

the Supreme Court held that:

“As long as it is in the statute book that the accused can elect to be tried

by a jury, the trial judge has an obligation not only to inquire from him

whether he is to be tried by a jury, judge must also inform that the accused

has a legal right to that effect. Non observance of this procedure is an

illegality and not a mere irregularity”.

In Jayasooriya and others v AG [2009] 1 SLR 101 the Court held that:

"To ensure a fair trial, the legislature in its wisdom from time to time has

promulgated several fundamental concepts and statutory duties into our

criminal law, the offering of the jury option is one such concept".

Appellate courts would therefore consider such omissions to be fatal

procedural defects rather than merely minor technicalities. Therefore, the

CA/HCC/117-118/2023

13 | P a g e

entire trial process may be declared void. In situations where the charge has

not been properly read and the process has not been followed; the Appellate

Court has the power to order a fresh trial.

Guided by the judgements mentioned above, I conclude that this is an

appropriate case to send for re-trial in respect of the 2nd Appellant. Therefore,

his appeal allowed.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to High Court

of Balapitiya along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL