==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/CPA/0102/2025

Page 1 of 28

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for Revision

from the order of the High Court of the

Central province holden at Kandy dated

13.02.2025

Assistant Commissioner of Cooperative

Development, Kandy District,

Department of Cooperative Development of

the Central Province, Ehelepola

Kumarihamy Mawatha, Bogambara,

Kandy.

Complainant

Vs

Vehicle Dealing Cooperative Society LTD of

the Central Province,

No 90/2,

Aniwaththa, Kandy

Accussed

1. R.A.A.P. Jayasinghe,

Director,

Vehicle Dealing Cooperative Society LTD of

the Central Province.

Personal address - No 90/2, Aniwaththa,

kandy.

Party Known as the 1st Accused after

service of Notices

MC Kandy Case No. 6007 HC Kandy Case No. APP 55/2018 CA Nos: CA/CPA/0102/25 (CA/CPA/0008/26) (CA/CPA/0009/26)

CA/CPA/0102/2025

Page 2 of 28

2. K. M. Weerasinghe,

No 32, Bahirawakanda, Kandy.

Party Known as the 2nd Accused after

service of Notices

3. Lal De Silva,

No 5/D, Waragaspela, Yakkgahapitiya.

Party Known as the 3rd Accused after

service of Notices

4. H. M. S. Herath,

Dadanwala Land, Asgiriya, Kandy.

Party Known as the 4th Accused after

service of Notices

5. Ravi De Silva,

No 206/2, Polgahaanga, Kandy

Party Known as the 5th Accused after

service of Notices

1.R.A.A.P. Jayasinghe,

Director,

Vehicle Dealing Cooperative Society LTD of

the Central Province.

Personal address - No 90/2, Aniwaththa,

Kandy.

2. K.M. Weerasinghe,

No 32, Bahirawakanda, Kandy.

Parties Known as the 1st and the 2nd

Accused after service of Notices –

Appellants

Vs.

1. Assistant Commissioner of Cooperative

CA/CPA/0102/2025

Page 3 of 28

Development, Kandy District,

Department of Cooperative Development

Central Province, Ehelepola Kumarihamy

Mawatha, Bogambara, Kandy.

Complainant Respondent

2. Vehicle Dealing Cooperative Society LTD

Central Province, No 90/2, Aniwaththa,

Kandy.

Accused Respondent

3. K.M.Weerasinghe,

No 32, Nahirawakanda, Kandy.

4. Lal De Silva,

No 5/D, Waragaspela, Yakkgahapitiya.

5. H.M.S.Herath,

Dadanwala Land, Asgiriya, Kandy.

6. Ravi De Silva,

No 206/2, Polgahaanga, Kandy

Parties Known as the 3rd to 6th Accused

after service of Notices – Respondents

7. H.D. Premawathi,

No 148, Dehigahahena, Pathiradha,

Harankata

Added Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. R.A.A.P.Jayasinghe,

Director,

Vehicle Dealing Cooperative Society LTD of

the Central Province, Kandy.

Personal address - No 90/2, Aniwaththa,

Kandy.

CA/CPA/0102/2025

Page 4 of 28

2. K.M.Weerasinghe,

No 32, Bahirawakanda, Kandy.

Parties Known as the 1st and the 2nd

Accused after service of Notices -

Appellant - Petitioners

Vs.

1. Assistant Commissioner of

Cooperative Development, Kandy District,

Department of Cooperative Development of

the Central Province, Ehelepola

Kumarihamy Mawatha, Bogambara,

Kandy.

Complainant - Respondent – Respondent

2. Vehicle Dealing Cooperative Society LTD

of the Central Province, No 196/B/1,

Pallemulla, Gohagoda, Haloluwa.

Accused - Respondent - Respondent

3. K.M.Weerasinghe,

No 32, Nahirawakanda, Kandy.

4. Lal De Silva,

No 5/D, Waragaspela, Yakkgahapitiya.

5. H.M.S.Herath,

Dadanwala Land, Asgiriya, Kandy.

6. Ravi De Silva,

No 206/2, Polgahaanga, Kandy

Parties Known as the 3rd to 5th accused

after service of Notices - Respondents -

Respondents

7. H.D. Premawathi,

No 148, Dehigahahena, Pathiradha,

Harankahawa.

CA/CPA/0102/2025

Page 5 of 28

Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J.

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Counsel : Dhananjaya Bogahawatta instructed by

Dilani Jayaneththi for the Parties known

as the 1st and 2nd Accused after service of

notices-Appellant-Petitioners.

The Complainant-Respondent-

Respondent, Accused-Respondent-

Respondent and The Parties known as the

3rd to 5th Accused after services of notices-

Respondents-Respondents are absent and

unrepresented.

Supported on : 05.02.2026

Written Submissions

of the Parties known

as the 1st and 2nd Accused

after service of notices-

Appellant-Petitioners

tendered on : 03.03.2026

Decided on : 22.05.2026

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

When the instant application in revision came on before us for support for notice,

the jurisdictional issue as to its maintainability arose in the following manner;

CA/CPA/0102/2025

Page 6 of 28

“Having failed to file an appeal to the Supreme Court as provided for by

section 9 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19

of 1990 as amended (hereinafter called and referred to as “the Act”), can

the Parties known the 1st and 2nd Accused after service of notices-Appellant-

Petitioner (hereinafter called and referred to as “the Petitioners”) invoke

the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal referred to in Article 138

of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

(hereinafter called and referred to as “the Constitution”) in order to canvass

the Judgement dated 13.02.2025 made by the Provincial High Court of the

Central Province holden at Kandy in the exercise of the Appellate

Jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution, a certified

copy of which was annexed to the petition marked as “I” (hereinafter called

and referred to as “the HC Judgement”)?”

We having heard the learned Counsel for the Petitioners in support of the

application for notice as well as on the jurisdictional issue, fixed this matter for

order.

Since, the jurisdictional issue appears to me to go to the root of the instant

application in revision, I would propose to deal with it in the first place.

The learned Counsel for the Petitioners sought to counter the jurisdictional issue

apparently, on the premise that the Petitioners did not seek to by-pass the

appellate structure in that he had first made an endeavour to invoke the

appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and it being unsuccessful, he had

thereafter, approached this Court invoking its revisionary jurisdiction only after

full disclosure of all material facts and therefore, he came to this Court with

clean hands invoking not a technical device but the constitutional supervisory

jurisdiction designed to prevent grave miscarriage of justice and therefore,

denying him a hearing on jurisdictional grounds at this point would leave the

Petitioners without any effective judicial recourse. The learned Counsel for the

CA/CPA/0102/2025

Page 7 of 28

Petitioners sought to mainly, rely on the decision in SC/Appeal/111/2015-SC-

Minutes of 27.05.2020 in resisting the jurisdictional issue so arose before us.

It is to be noted at this juncture, that learned Counsel for the Petitioners in the

connected applications in revision bearing Nos.CA/CPA/0008/26 and

CA/CPA/0009/26 informed Court that the Petitioners thereto, too, will abide by

the decision of this Court in the present application in revision, namely;

CA/CPA/0102/25. Hence, order in the instant application in revision will bind

the Petitioners in the connected applications in revision bearing Nos.

CA/CPA/0008/26 and CA/CPA/0009/26 too, as indicated to Court by learned

Counsel.

The Petitioners in the instant application in revision seeks to revise and set aside

the HC Judgement, made by the learned High Court Judge of the Central

Province holden at Kandy (hereinafter called and referred to as “the learned High

Court Judge of the Province”) in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested

in him by Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution, whereby, the learned High Court

Judge of the Province had having upheld the preliminary legal objection raised

by the Respondent as to the maintainability of the appeal preferred thereto by

the Petitioners on the premise that right of appeal would not be available against

the order appealed from, dismissed the appeal with costs.

It is an undisputed fact that the HC Judgement (I) sought to be revised and set

aside in the instant application in revision, is a final judgement made by the

learned High Court Judge of the Province in the exercise of the appellate

jurisdiction vested in him by Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution to be read with

Article 138 thereof; and that a direct appeal will lie to the Supreme Court

therefrom as provided for by section 9 of the Act with leave to appeal from the

High Court or the special leave to appeal from the Supreme Court first had and

obtained as the case may be.

CA/CPA/0102/2025

Page 8 of 28

When the jurisdictional issue is viewed in the light of the law set out in sections

9 and 10 of the Act and Articles 127 and 128(4) of the Constitution to be read

with Articles 154P(3)(b) and 138 thereof, the pertinent question that would now,

arise for our consideration is whether a judgement or a final order made by a

High Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise

of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154P(3)(b) of the

Constitution to be read with 138 thereof, is amendable to an extra-ordinary

revisionary jurisdiction of this Court when sections 9 and 10 of the Act and

Articles 127 and 128(4) of the Constitution “expressly”, confers upon a

party aggrieved by such an order a right of appeal to the Supreme Court

with leave of the High Court or the Supreme Court first had and obtained

as the case may be, thereby, by-passing and/or disregarding the clear

statutory command and frustrating the very object of the Provincial High

Court scheme and the appellate structure so provided thereby. [Emphasis

is mine]

It is in this context, let me now, examine the jurisdictional issue.

Article 138(1) of the Constitution enacts that,

“The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise subject to the provisions of

the Constitution or of any law, an appellate jurisdiction for the correction

of all errors in fact or in law which shall be [committed by the High Court,

in the exercise of its appellate or original jurisdiction or by any Court of

First Instance], tribunal or other institution and sole and exclusive

cognizance, by way of appeal, revision and restitutio in integrum, of all

causes, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things [of which such

High Court, Court of First Instance], tribunal or other institution may have

taken cognizance...”

Proviso-not reproduced.

CA/CPA/0102/2025

Page 9 of 28

It was inter-alia, held by the Supreme Court in Weragama v. Eksath Lanka

Wathu Kamkam Samithiya and others-1994[1] SLR 329, that “….however,

the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal under Article 138 is not an entrenched

jurisdiction, because Article 138 provides that it is subject to the provisions “of

any law"; hence it was always constitutionally permissible for that jurisdiction

to be reduced or transferred by ordinary law (of course, to a body entitled to

exercise judicial power). That is the reason why I held in Swastika Textile

Industries Ltd. v. Dayaratne, that section 3 of the Act, conferred concurrent,

appellate and revisionary jurisdiction on the High Courts in respect of Labour

Tribunals, and that thereafter section 31D3 of the Industrial Disputes Act, as

amended by Act No. 32 of 1990, made that jurisdiction exclusive, thereby taking

away the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal in that respect.

It was inter-alia, held by the Supreme Court in SC/Appeal/65/2025-Decided

on 10.10.2025 at page 32 that, “In this context, it would be legally

impermissible and institutionally unsound for the Court of Appeal, in pari

materia, to sit in appeal over judgments and orders pronounced by a Provincial

High Court in the exercise of its appellate or revisionary jurisdiction. A party

cannot pursue successive appeals before two courts of coordinate jurisdiction in

respect of the same matter. This strikes at the very root of the issue. Such a

practice is inimical to legislative intent, imposes unnecessary burdens on the

judicial system, and undermines the principle of finality in litigation. These

considerations make clear that concurrent jurisdiction was intended to provide

an alternative forum for appellate review, not to create an additional tier in the

appellate hierarchy.”.

Hence, it becomes manifest that the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal under

Article 138 is not entrenched and therefore, not absolute and as such it is

inherently, conditional and it can thus, be altered by ordinary law as held by

Supreme Court in Weragama v. Eksath Lanka Wathu Kamkam Samithiya and

CA/CPA/0102/2025

Page 10 of 28

others (Supra) and in Swasthika Textiles Industries Ltd Vs Dayaratne-1993

[2] SLR 348

The Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution enacted Article 154P(1) to the

Constitution and it reads thus;

“There shall be a High Court for each Province with effect from the date on

which this Chapter comes into force. Each such High Court shall be

designated as the High Court of the relevant Province.”

Hence, Article 154P(1) of the Constitution so enacted by the Thirteenth

Amendment, made provisions for the establishment of the High Courts in the

provinces.

Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution enacted by the Thirteenth Amendment to

the Constitution, reads thus;

“Every such High Court shall –

(b) notwithstanding anything in Article 138 and subject to any law,

exercise, appellate and revisionary jurisdiction in respect of convictions,

sentences and orders entered or imposed by Magistrates Courts and

Primary Courts within the Province;” [Emphasis is mine]

Hence, Article 154P(3)(b) conferred upon the High Court so established under

Article 154P(1) the appellate and revisionary jurisdiction in respect of

convictions, sentences and orders entered or imposed by Magistrates Courts and

Primary Courts within the Province notwithstanding anything in Article 138

and subject to any law. [Emphasis is mine]

Article 154P(6) of the Constitution enacted by Thirteenth Amendment to the

Constitution confers upon any person aggrieved by a final order, judgment or

sentence of any such High Court so established under Article 154P(1) of the

Constitution made in the exercise of its jurisdiction under paragraphs (3)(b) or

CA/CPA/0102/2025

Page 11 of 28

(3)(c) or (4) a right of appeal to the Court of Appeal in accordance with Article

138 of the Constitution subject to the provisions of the Constitution and any law

and it reads thus;

“(6) subject to the provisions of the Constitution and any law, any

person aggrieved by a final order, judgment or sentence of any such Court,

in the exercise of its jurisdiction under paragraphs (3)(b) or (3)(c) or (4) may

appeal there from to the Court of Appeal in accordance with Article 138.”

[Emphasis is mine]

However, no provision was made with regard to the procedure to be followed in

such High Courts. With a view to providing for the lacuna in the law with regard

to the procedure to be followed in the High Court of the Provinces, so established

under Article 154P(1) of the Constitution which enacted by the Thirteenth

Amendment to the Constitution, the Act was enacted making provision

“regarding the procedure to be followed in, and the right to appeal to, and from,

the High Court established under Article 154P of the Constitution”.

The Act also made provision for the appeals to be brought in before the Court of

Appeal as well as the Supreme Court from the High Court. While section 9 of the

Act provides for the appeals to Supreme Court from High Court, section 11

thereof provides for appeals to Court of Appeal from the High Court established

under Article 154P of the Constitution.

Section 9 of the Act reads thus;

“9. Subject to the provisions of this Act or any other law, any person

aggrieved by

(a) a final order, judgment, decree or sentence of a High Court

established by Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise of the

appellate jurisdiction vested in it by paragraph (3) (b) of Article 154P of the

Constitution or section 3 of this Act or any other law, in any matter or

CA/CPA/0102/2025

Page 12 of 28

proceeding whether civil or criminal which involves a substantial question

of law, may appeal therefrom to the Supreme Court if the High Court

grants leave to appeal to the Supreme Court ex mero motu or at the

instance of any aggrieved party to such matter or proceedings :

Provided that the Supreme Court may, in its discretion, grant special

leave to appeal to the Supreme Court from “any final” or

“interlocutory order”, judgment, decree or sentence made by such High

Court, in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by paragraph

(3) (b) of Article 154P of the Constitution or section 3 of this Act, or any

other law where such High Court has refused to grant leave to appeal

to the Supreme Court, or where in the opinion of the Supreme Court,

the case or matter is fit for review by the Supreme Court:

Provided further that the Supreme Court shall grant leave to appeal in

every matter or proceeding in which it is satisfied that the question to be

decided is of public or general importance; and

(b) a final order, judgment or sentence of a High Court established by

Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise of its jurisdiction conferred

on it by paragraph (3) (a), or (4) of Article 154P of the Constitution may

appeal therefrom to the Court of Appeal.”[Emphasis is mine]

Section 10 of the Act which sets out the powers of the Supreme Court on appeal,

enacts thus;

“(1) The Supreme Court shall, subject to the Constitution be the final Court

of appellate jurisdiction within Sri Lanka for the correction of all errors in

fact or in law which shall be committed by a High Court established by

Article 154P of the Constitution, in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction

vested in it by paragraph (3) (b) of Article 154P of the Constitution or

section 3 of this Act, or any other law and the judgments and orders of the

CA/CPA/0102/2025

Page 13 of 28

Supreme Court shall, in such cases, be final and conclusive in all such

matters.

(2) The Supreme Court shall, in the exercise of its jurisdiction, have sole

and exclusive cognizance by way of appeal from any order, judgment,

decree or sentence made by a High Court established by Article 154P of

the Constitution, in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in such

High Court by paragraph (3) (b) of Article 154P of the Constitution or

section 3 of this Act or any other law and it may affirm, reverse or vary any

such order, judgment, decree or sentence of such High Court and may

issue such directions to such High Court or Court of First Instance or

order a new trial or further hearing in any proceedings as justice may

require and may also call for and admit fresh or additional evidence if the

interests of justice so demands and may in such event, direct that such

evidence be recorded by such High Court, or any Court of First Instance.”

Section 3 of the Act enacts thus;

“A High Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution for a Province

shall, subject to any law, exercise appellate and revisionary jurisdiction

in respect of orders made by Labour Tribunals within that Province

and orders made under section 5 or section 9 of the Agrarian Services Act,

No. 58 of 1979, in respect of any land situated within that Province”.

[Emphasis is mine]

Article 127 of the Constitution which sets out the appellate jurisdiction of the

Supreme Court, enacts thus;

“(1) The Supreme Court shall, subject to the Constitution, be the final

Court of civil and criminal appellate jurisdiction for and within the

Republic of Sri Lanka for the correction of all errors in fact or in law which

shall be committed by the Court of Appeal or any Court of First Instance,

tribunal or other institution and the judgments and orders of the

CA/CPA/0102/2025

Page 14 of 28

Supreme Court shall in all cases be final and conclusive in all such

matters.” [Emphasis is mine]

(2)Not Reproduced.

Article 128(4) of the Constitution enacts thus;

“An appeal shall lie directly to the Supreme Court on any matter and in

the manner specifically provided for by any other law passed by

Parliament.” [Emphasis is mine]

Upon a careful analysis of section 9(a) of the Act, it becomes manifestly, clear

that, subject to the provisions of the Act or any other law, any person aggrieved

by a final order, judgment, decree or sentence of a High Court established by

Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested

in it by paragraph (3)(b) of Article 154P of the Constitution or section 3 of the

Act or any other law, in any matter or proceeding whether civil or criminal which

involves a substantial question of law, may appeal therefrom to the Supreme

Court if the High Court grants leave to appeal to the Supreme Court ex

mero motu or at the instance of any aggrieved party to such matter or

proceedings.

Article 128(4) of the Constitution also makes similar provision which enacts

thus;

“An appeal shall lie directly to the Supreme Court on any matter and in

the manner specifically provided for by any other law passed by

Parliament.” [Emphasis is mine]

The cumulative effect of the provisions enumerated above, is to expressly, and

unambiguously, provide for a right of appeal “only” and “directly” to the

Supreme Court from a final judgement or a final order made by a High Court

established under Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise of its appellate

jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154P(3)(b) thereof. [Emphasis is mine]

CA/CPA/0102/2025

Page 15 of 28

The pertinent question that would then, arise for our consideration is; What was

the specific objective that the legislature intended to achieve by expressly,

unequivocally and unambiguously, providing for a right of appeal “only” and

“directly” to the apex Court in the judicial hierarchy of this country-the Supreme

Court, by the law as enumerated above, to an aggrieved party?.

In my view, the specific objective intended to be achieved by the legislature

thereby, was to arrest delays in the administration of justice by conferring

finality upon a matters under review for; the judgments and orders of the

Supreme Court shall in all cases be final and conclusive in all such matters.”

as enumerated by Article 127(1) of the Constitution which would in turn, result

in the early and expeditious disposal of the disputes arising out of matters as

such. [Emphasis is mine]

The question that would next arise for our consideration in view of the

jurisdictional issue so arose before us, would be;

in the light of the law set out above, does the Court of Appeal have a

revisionary jurisdiction in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution in

respect of a final judgement or a final order of the Provincial High

Court made in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it

by Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution? [Emphasis is mine]

It was observed by the Supreme Court in Gunawardane And Others Vs.

Muthukumarana and Others (Supra) at page 314 that, “At the outset, it must be

borne in mind that the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal is a

Constitutional mandate. Its genesis lies in Article 138 of the Constitution. There is

no question that the Constitution is the supreme law of the land (vide In Re

Reference under Article 125(1) of the Constitution. In those circumstances, any

ouster or restriction of a Court's jurisdiction which is founded on the Constitution,

in so far as it is permitted under the Constitution, must be made in express

language. In Re the Nineteenth Amendment to the Constitution, a bench of 7 judges

CA/CPA/0102/2025

Page 16 of 28

unequivocally opined that "This manifests a cardinal rule that applies to the

interpretation of a Constitution, that there can be no implied amendment of any

provision of the Constitution" (at page 110). Therefore, it is only right and befitting

that this Court insists that every provision which restricts or modifies a Court's

Constitutional mandate is express and set out in no uncertain terms.”.

It is in this context, I would think it expedient at this juncture to direct my

judicial mind to the observations explicitly, made by the Supreme Court in a

later case in W.T.S. Nilantha Fernando Vs. P.M.S. Nilanthi Perera (Supra),

dealing with the observations so made by the Supreme Court in Gunawardane

v. Muthukumarana (Supra), and they may be reproduced verbatim the same as

follows to the extent that would be necessary for the proper resolution of the

jurisdictional issue so arose before us as enumerated above;

“The Court of Appeal relied heavily on the judgment of this court in

Gunawardane v. Muthukumarana [2020] 3 Sri LR 306 in overruling the

preliminary objection raised by the defendant on jurisdiction. In that case,

at page 310, this court held as follows: Section 9 of the High Court of the

Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990, as amended, does not

oust the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal in respect of decisions

made by a Provincial High Court exercising its appellate powers. Therefore,

the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal referred to in Article 138

of the Constitution of the Republic of Sri Lanka can be invoked in order to

canvass a decision made by a Provincial High Court exercising its appellate

powers.

With all due respect, I am unable to agree with that conclusion. That

judgment is predominantly premised on the conceptual separation of

revision from appeal, in the manner adopted by Sansoni C.J. in the oft

quoted decision in Mariam Beebee v. Seyed Mohomed (1965) 68 NLR 36,

where it was observed at page 38:

CA/CPA/0102/2025

Page 17 of 28

The power of revision is an extraordinary power which is quite independent

of and distinct from the appellate jurisdiction of this Court. Its object is the

due administration of justice and the correction of errors, sometimes

committed by this Court itself, in order to avoid miscarriages of justice. It is

exercised in some cases by a Judge of his own motion, when an aggrieved

person who may not be a party to the action brings to his notice the fact that,

unless the power is exercised, injustice will result. The Partition Act has not,

I conceive, made any change in this respect, and the power can still be

exercised in respect of any order or decree of a lower Court.

When Mariam Beebee v. Seyed Mohomed was decided in 1965, Sri Lanka

was governed by the Soulbury Constitution. Neither the Soulbury

Constitution nor the First Republican Constitution of 1972 contained any

provision equivalent to Article 138 of the present Constitution of 1978, which

expressly enacts the appellate, revisionary, and restitutio in integrum

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal, to be exercised “subject to the provisions

of the Constitution or of any law.”

Indeed, the Supreme Court in Gunawardane, at page 314, acknowledged:

“At the outset, it must be borne in mind that the revisionary jurisdiction of

the Court of Appeal is a Constitutional mandate. Its genesis lies in Article

138 of the Constitution.” However, both the Supreme Court in Gunawardane

and the Court of Appeal in the instant case failed to properly appreciate that

Article 138 is not an entrenched provision but an enabling one. Article 138(1)

itself makes plain that the appellate jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal “by

way of appeal, revision and restitutio in integrum” is “subject to the

provisions of the Constitution or of any law”. Nevertheless, both courts

proceeded on the footing that, in the absence of an express exclusion, the

Court of Appeal continues to retain revisionary jurisdiction over judgments

of the Provincial High Court.

CA/CPA/0102/2025

Page 18 of 28

At page 316 of Gunawardane, it was further stated: “As I observed earlier,

the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal is a Constitutional

mandate which, undoubtedly, is subject to the provisions of statutory law.

Nevertheless, owing to its genesis in the Constitution, any restriction or

modification which the Legislature seeks to introduce must be introduced by

way of express wording.” In my view, this reasoning is untenable. Whilst

conferring revisionary jurisdiction on the Court of Appeal, the Constitution

itself expressly stipulates that such jurisdiction is “subject to the provisions

of the Constitution or of any law.” When the Constitution at the outset makes

clear that the revisionary jurisdiction is conditional and not absolute, there

is no need for express words of exclusion. Parliament, by ordinary

legislation, is empowered to regulate, modify, or reallocate such jurisdiction.

To hold otherwise would elevate Article 138(1) to a status of entrenchment

which the Constitution has not conferred.

This is consistent with the principle affirmed in Swasthika Textile Industries

Ltd v. Dayaratne, where the Supreme Court held that appellate and

revisionary jurisdiction under Article 138(1) is not entrenched and can be

altered by ordinary law. In that case, the Supreme Court held that section

31DD, introduced into the Industrial Disputes Act by Act No. 32 of 1990,

which provides that: “Any workman, trade union or employer who is

aggrieved by any final order of a High Court established under Article 154P

of the Constitution, in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it

by law or in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by law, in

relation to an order of a Labour Tribunal, may appeal therefrom to the

Supreme Court with the leave of the High Court or the Supreme Court first

had and obtained”, removed the appellate and revisionary jurisdiction of the

Court of Appeal in respect of final orders of the High Court made in relation

to orders of Labour Tribunals, and vested such jurisdiction exclusively in the

Supreme Court. In that instance also, there was no express removal of the

revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal. This position was

CA/CPA/0102/2025

Page 19 of 28

subsequently accepted as correct by a Bench of five Judges of this court in

Abeywardene v. Ajith De Silva [1998] 1 Sri LR 134 at 140.

As I have emphasised repeatedly, Provincial High Courts were vested with

special jurisdiction under Acts Nos. 19 of 1990, 10 of 1996, and 54 of 2006

with the specific objective of arresting delays in the administration of justice.

Sansoni C.J. in Mariam Beebee v. Seyed Mohomed did not recognise the

revisionary power as an absolute and unqualified principle of law; rather,

His Lordship acknowledged that its exercise is subject to legislative intent.

This is apparent from his explicit observation in the above excerpt that “The

Partition Act has not, I conceive, made any change in this respect, and the

power [of revision] can still be exercised in respect of any order or decree of

a lower Court”, thus recognising that the legislature could, through statute,

alter or limit the scope of revisionary powers.

Unlike the Partition Act considered in Mariam Beebee, Acts Nos. 19 of 1990,

10 of 1996, and 54 of 2006 expressly restructure appellate jurisdiction and,

by their terms, exclude any intermediate recourse to the Court of Appeal

from judgments and orders of Provincial High Courts exercising their

appellate jurisdiction. The legislative design, read together with the enabling

nature of Article 138, leaves no scope for the Court of Appeal to invoke its

appellate, revisionary or restitutio in integrum jurisdiction in such instances,

without disregarding the clear statutory command and frustrating the very

object of the Provincial High Court scheme.”

Hence, the view taken by the Supreme Court in a bench of five judges in

Abeywardene v. Ajith De Silva 1998 [1] SLR 134 at Page 140 as well as the

view taken by the Supreme Court in Swasthika Textile Industries Ltd v.

Dayaratne (Supra) and the recent decision of the Supreme Court in W.T.S.

Nilantha Fernando Vs. P.M.S. Nilanthi Perera (Supra), is that while conferring

revisionary jurisdiction on the Court of Appeal, the Constitution itself expressly

enunciates that such jurisdiction is “subject to the provisions of the Constitution

CA/CPA/0102/2025

Page 20 of 28

or of any law” and therefore, its exercise is subject to legislative intent; and that

when the Constitution at the outset makes clear that the revisionary jurisdiction

is conditional and not absolute, there is no need for express words of exclusion

for; in such an instance Parliament, by ordinary legislation, is empowered to

regulate, modify, or re-allocate such jurisdiction; and that to hold otherwise

would elevate Article 138(1) to a status of entrenchment which the Constitution

has not conferred; and that appellate and revisionary jurisdiction vested in the

Court of Appeal under Article 138(1) of the Constitution which is not entrenched,

can thus, be altered by ordinary law.

In the result, in my opinion, the cumulative effect of sections 9 and 10 of the

Act, taken in conjunction with Articles 127(1) and 128(4) of the Constitution, is

to confer upon an aggrieved party a direct appeal to the Supreme Court with

leave first had and obtained as enumerated therein, from an order made by the

learned High Court Judge of the Province in the exercise of the appellate

jurisdiction vested in him under Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution thus,

clearly, removing the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal in

respect of the final judgements and final orders of the High Court

established under Article 154P of the Constitution so made in the exercise of

the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution and

thereby, vesting such jurisdiction “exclusively” in the Supreme Court in

keeping with the clear statutory command and not frustrating the very object of

the Provincial High Court scheme intended to be achieved by the Legislature by

enacting those special provisions both to the Constitution as well as to the Act

as enumerated above. The pivotal point to be stressed here is that in this

instance too, there was no express removal of the revisionary jurisdiction of the

Court of Appeal. [Emphasis is mine]

Similar question of law as arisen before us for our consideration in the instant

application in revision as enumerated above, had arisen for its consideration in

CA/CPA/0102/2025

Page 21 of 28

the decision in Gunawardane And Others Vs. Muthukumarana and Others

(Supra) and it was held at page 14 as follows;

“Particularly in relation to the revisionary jurisdiction, which exists to

remedy miscarriage of justice, greater care must be exercised when

employing the maxim. As I observed earlier, the revisionary jurisdiction of

the Court of Appeal is a Constitutional mandate which, undoubtedly is

subject to the provision of statutory law. Nevertheless, owing to its genesis

in the Constitution, any restriction or modification which the Legislature

seeks to introduce must be introduced by way of express wording. The

omission to refer to ‘revisionary jurisdiction’ in Section 9 of Act No. 19 of

1990 cannot be taken as reducing the Court of Appeal’s plenitude of

powers under Article 138. Nothing less than an express removal of these

powers would be required to achieve such a result.”

It was further held at page 16 as follows;

“Therefore, I hold that Section 9 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special

Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 as amended, does not oust the Revisionary

Jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal in respect of decisions made by a

Provincial High Court exercising its appellate powers.”

However, subsequent to the decision in Gunawardane And Others Vs.

Muthukumarana and Others (Supra), it was held by the Supreme Court in the

recent decision in W.T.S. Nilantha Fernando Vs. P.M.S. Nilanthi Perera

(Supra) at pages 44 to 47 as follows;

“The Court of Appeal relied heavily on the judgment of this court in

Gunawardane v. Muthukumarana [2020] 3 Sri LR 306 in overruling the

preliminary objection raised by the defendant on jurisdiction. In that case,

at page 310, this court held as follows: Section 9 of the High Court of the

Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990, as amended, does not

oust the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal in respect of decisions

CA/CPA/0102/2025

Page 22 of 28

made by a Provincial High Court exercising its appellate powers. Therefore,

the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal referred to in Article 138

of the Constitution of the Republic of Sri Lanka can be invoked in order to

canvass a decision made by a Provincial High Court exercising its appellate

powers. With all due respect, I am unable to agree with that conclusion. That

judgment is predominantly premised on the conceptual separation of

revision from appeal, in the manner adopted by Sansoni C.J. in the oft

quoted decision in Mariam Beebee v. Seyed Mohomed (1965) 68 NLR 36,

where it was observed at page 38: The power of revision is an extraordinary

power which is quite independent of and distinct from the appellate

jurisdiction of this Court. Its object is the due administration of justice and

the correction of errors, sometimes committed by this Court itself, in order to

avoid miscarriages of justice. It is exercised in some cases by a Judge of his

own motion, when an aggrieved person who may not be a party to the action

brings to his notice the fact that, unless the power is exercised, injustice will

result. The Partition Act has not, I conceive, made any change in this respect,

and the power can still be exercised in respect of any order or decree of a

lower Court.

When Mariam Beebee v. Seyed Mohomed was decided in 1965, Sri Lanka

was governed by the Soulbury Constitution. Neither the Soulbury

Constitution nor the First Republican Constitution of 1972 contained any

provision equivalent to Article 138 of the present Constitution of 1978, which

expressly enacts the appellate, revisionary, and restitutio in integrum

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal, to be exercised “subject to the provisions

of the Constitution or of any law.” Indeed, the Supreme Court in

Gunawardane, at page 314, acknowledged: “At the outset, it must be borne

in mind that the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal is a

Constitutional mandate. Its genesis lies in Article 138 of the Constitution.”

However, both the Supreme Court in Gunawardane and the Court of Appeal

in the instant case failed to properly appreciate that Article 138 is not an

CA/CPA/0102/2025

Page 23 of 28

entrenched provision but an enabling one. Article 138(1) itself makes plain

that the appellate jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal “by way of appeal,

revision and restitutio in integrum” is “subject to the provisions of the

Constitution or of any law”. Nevertheless, both courts proceeded on the

footing that, in the absence of an express exclusion, the Court of Appeal

continues to retain revisionary jurisdiction over judgments of the Provincial

High Court. At page 316 of Gunawardane, it was further stated: “As I

observed earlier, the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal is a

Constitutional mandate which, undoubtedly, is subject to the provisions of

statutory law. Nevertheless, owing to its genesis in the Constitution, any

restriction or modification which the Legislature seeks to introduce must be

introduced by way of express wording.” In my view, this reasoning is

untenable. Whilst conferring revisionary jurisdiction on the Court of Appeal,

the Constitution itself expressly stipulates that such jurisdiction is “subject

to the provisions of the Constitution or of any law.” When the Constitution

at the outset makes clear that the revisionary jurisdiction is conditional and

not absolute, there is no need for express words of exclusion. Parliament, by

ordinary legislation, is empowered to regulate, modify, or reallocate such

jurisdiction. To hold otherwise would elevate Article 138(1) to a status of

entrenchment which the Constitution has not conferred.

This is consistent with the principle affirmed in Swasthika Textile Industries

Ltd v. Dayaratne, where the Supreme Court held that appellate and

revisionary jurisdiction under Article 138(1) is not entrenched and can be

altered by ordinary law. In that case, the Supreme Court held that section

31DD, introduced into the Industrial Disputes Act by Act No. 32 of 1990,

which provides that: “Any workman, trade union or employer who is

aggrieved by any final order of a High Court established under Article 154P

of the Constitution, in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it

by law or in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by law, in

relation to an order of a Labour Tribunal, may appeal therefrom to the

CA/CPA/0102/2025

Page 24 of 28

Supreme Court with the leave of the High Court or the Supreme Court first

had and obtained”, removed the appellate and revisionary jurisdiction of the

Court of Appeal in respect of final orders of the High Court made in relation

to orders of Labour Tribunals, and vested such jurisdiction exclusively in the

Supreme Court. In that instance also, there was no express removal of the

revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal. This position was

subsequently accepted as correct by a Bench of five Judges of this court in

Abeywardene v. Ajith De Silva [1998] 1 Sri LR 134 at 140.

As I have emphasised repeatedly, Provincial High Courts were vested with

special jurisdiction under Acts Nos. 19 of 1990, 10 of 1996, and 54 of 2006

with the specific objective of arresting delays in the administration of justice.

Sansoni C.J. in Mariam Beebee v. Seyed Mohomed did not recognise the

revisionary power as an absolute and unqualified principle of law; rather,

His Lordship acknowledged that its exercise is subject to legislative intent.

This is apparent from his explicit observation in the above excerpt that “The

Partition Act has not, I conceive, made any change in this respect, and the

power [of revision] can still be exercised in respect of any order or decree of

a lower Court”, thus recognising that the legislature could, through statute,

alter or limit the scope of revisionary powers.

Unlike the Partition Act considered in Mariam Beebee, Acts Nos. 19 of 1990,

10 of 1996, and 54 of 2006 expressly restructure appellate jurisdiction and,

by their terms, exclude any intermediate recourse to the Court of Appeal

from judgments and orders of Provincial High Courts exercising their

appellate jurisdiction. The legislative design, read together with the enabling

nature of Article 138, leaves no scope for the Court of Appeal to invoke its

appellate, revisionary or restitutio in integrum jurisdiction in such instances,

without disregarding the clear statutory command and frustrating the very

object of the Provincial High Court scheme.” [Vide-pages 44 to 47]

CA/CPA/0102/2025

Page 25 of 28

It was further observed by the Supreme Court in the recent decision in W.T.S.

Nilantha Fernando Vs. P.M.S. Nilanthi Perera (Supra) at pages 48 and 49 as

follows;

“Gunawardane has not been followed in several subsequent decisions,

including Abeydasa v. People’s Bank (CA/CPA/124/2021, CA Minutes of

05.06.2023) and Malwatta v. Softlogic Finance PLC and Others

(CA/CPA/152/2022, CA Minutes of 31.08.2023).”

Having so observed, the Supreme Court in the recent decision in W.T.S.

Nilantha Fernando Vs. P.M.S. Nilanthi Perera (Supra) at pages 49 and 50 had

stated as follows;

“In my view, the reasoning in Gunawardane v. Muthukumarana [2020] 3

Sri LR 306 cannot be reconciled with the clear statutory scheme

established by Acts Nos. 19 of 1990, 10 of 1996, and 54 of 2006, read in

conjunction with Article 138 of the Constitution. The approach adopted by

the Supreme Court in Merchant Bank of Sri Lanka Ltd v. Perera [2012]

BLR 14 accords with both the constitutional framework and the legislative

intent and, in my respectful view, ought to be preferred.”

In the light of the above, it is highly unlikely that Parliament or the legislative

draftsmen ever intended to manifestly complicate the appeal process by

disregarding the clear statutory command and frustrating the very object of the

Provincial High Court scheme, when the Provincial High Courts have been

introduced to reduce and simplify the court process not to complicate it even

further. According to the legal maxim ‘Boni judicis est lites dirimere, ne lis ex lite

oritur, et interest republicae ut sint fines litium’, it is the duty of a good judge to

prevent litigations, that suit may not grow out of suits, and it concerns the

welfare of the State that an end be put to litigation. It would be contrary to the

practice of a good judge to interpret statutes in a manner that would give rise to

CA/CPA/0102/2025

Page 26 of 28

unnecessary complications in the judicial process as held by this Court in

Malwatta v. Softlogic Finance PLC and Others (Supra).

In view of the line of reasoning so adduced by the Supreme Court in the recent

decision in W.T.S. Nilantha Fernando Vs. P.M.S. Nilanthi Perera (Supra) as

enumerated above, I would, if I may say so, with all due respect to the Supreme

Court in its decision in Gunawardane And Others Vs. Muthukumarana and

Others (Supra), prefer to follow the approach adopted by the Supreme Court in

the recent decision in W.T.S. Nilantha Fernando Vs. P.M.S. Nilanthi Perera

(Supra) as enumerated above, for; if I may say so, with all due respect to our

Apex Court-the Supreme Court of this Country, the said approach adopted by

the Supreme Court in W.T.S. Nilantha Fernando Vs. P.M.S. Nilanthi Perera

(Supra) fully, accords with both the Constitutional framework and the legislative

intent with regard to the clear statutory scheme established by the Act No.19 of

1990, sections 9 and 10 thereof, in particular, taken in conjunction with Articles

127, 128(4), 154P(3)(b) and 138 of the Constitution as enumerated above.

In the light of the above, I would hold that in terms of sections 9 and 10 of the

Act taken in conjunction with Articles 127,128(4),138 and 154P(3)(b) of the

Constitution, a direct appeal in respect of a decision made by a Provincial High

Court established under Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise of

appellate jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution, will lie

to the Supreme Court with leave first had and obtained, and therefore, those

provisions of law referred to above, clearly, oust the revisionary jurisdiction of

the Court of Appeal in respect of a decision as such and therefore, a revision will

not lie to the Court of Appeal from an order as such.

I would therefore, hold that the Petitioners to the instant application in revision,

cannot in law, invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of this Court from the

judgement (I) made by the learned High Court Judge of the Province in the

exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154P(3)(b) of the

Constitution in total disregard of the clear statutory command and in total

CA/CPA/0102/2025

Page 27 of 28

frustration of the Provincial High Court Scheme established by the 13th

Amendment to the Constitution for; a direct appeal therefrom, will lie to the

Supreme Court with leave first had and obtained as enumerated above.

In view of my findings as aforesaid, I would hold that the decisions referred to in

their written submissions by the Petitioners are of no assistance or of little

assistance for the resolution of the jurisdictional issue so arose before us.

In the light of the law set out above, I would hold that this Court has no

jurisdiction to hear and determine the instant application in revision.

In view of my findings as aforesaid, I would proceed to answer the jurisdictional

issue so arose before us in the negative.

Hence, I would refuse to issue notices on the Respondents.

In the result, I would dismiss the instant application in revision in-limine.

However, taking into my consideration, all the facts and circumstances of the

instant application in revision, I would make no order for costs.

Since, the Petitioners in the connected applications in revision bearing No.

CA/CPA/0008/26 and CA/CPA/0009/26 undertook to abide by the order of this

Court in the instant application in revision, I would order that the Petitioners in

the connected application in revision bearing No. CA/CPA/0008/26 and

No.CA/CPA/0009/26 are bound by the order of the instant application in

revision.

In the circumstances, I would proceed to dismiss the connected applications in

revision bearing Nos. CA/CPA/0008/26 and CA/CPA/0009/26 too, in limine.

However, taking into my consideration, all the facts and circumstances of the

applications in revision bearing Nos. CA/CPA/0008/26 and CA/CPA/0009/26,

I would make no order for costs.

CA/CPA/0102/2025

Page 28 of 28

Registrar is directed to file a copy of order of the instant application in revision,

of record in the connected applications in revision bearing Nos.

CA/CPA/0008/26 and CA/CPA/0009/26.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL