==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of

Section 331of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979

Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant

Court of Appeal Case No: Vs,

CA/HCC/0128/2023

High Court of Vavuniya

Case No. HCV/2899/19 Pararasasingham Kokulakrishnan

Accused

And Now Between

Pararasasingham Kokulakrishnan

Accused-Appellant

Vs,

Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent

2

Before: Amal Ranaraja, J.

Dr. Sumudu Premachandra, J.

Counsel: Delan de Silva for the Accused-Appellant

Azard Navavi, ASG for the Respondent

Argued on: 24.08.2026

Judgment on: 18.09.2026

Judgment

Amal Ranaraja. J,

1. The accused-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the “apellant”) has

been indicted in the High Court of Vavuniya in Case No. HCV/2899/19.

The charges in the indictment are as follows;

01. That between the dates of 1st January, 2015 and 31st

December, 2015, within the jurisdiction of this Court, in

Mankulam, you did commit rape against one Kokila Krishnan

Thamilini, a female child, who is your daughter, under the age

of 16 years, as described in Section 364(a)(1) of the Penal Code

(as Amended) thereby you have committed an offence

3

punishable under Section 364(3) of the Penal Code of Sri

Lanka (as Amended).

02. That between the dates of 1st January, 2015 and 31st

December, 2015, within the jurisdiction of this Court, in

Mankulam, on an occasion other than that of the above first

charge, you did commit rape against one Kokila Krishnan

Thamilini, a female child, who is your daughter, under the age

of 16 years, as described in Section 364(a)(1) of the Penal Code

(as Amended); thereby you have committed an offence

punishable under Section 364(3) of the Penal Code of Sri

Lanka (as Amended).

03. That between the dates of 1st January, 2015 and 31st

December, 2015, within the jurisdiction of this Court, in

Mankulam, on an occasion other than that of the above first

and second charges, you did commit rape against one Kokila

Krishnan Thamilini, a female child, who is your daughter,

under the age of 16 years, as described in Section 364(a)(1) of

the Penal Code (as Amended); thereby you have committed an

offence punishable under Section 364(3) of the Penal Code of

Sri Lanka (as Amended).

2. At the conclusion of the trial the appellant has been convicted of all

charges and sentenced as follows;

i. 15 years rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs.5000.00, with

a term of 1 month rigorous imprisonment in default, in respect

of each charge.

The appellant has also been directed to pay a sum of

Rs.100,000.00 as compensation to PW01, with a term of 3

months rigorous imprisonment in default

4

It has also been directed that the substantive terms of rigorous

imprisonment shall run concurrently.

3. The appellant being aggrieved by the conviction, disputed judgement

and sentencing order, has preferred the instant appeal to this Court.

Case of the Prosecution

4. PW01 is the second child of the appellant. It is alleged that during the

relevant period, the appellant has engaged in penile-vaginal penetration

with PW01 against her will. This reportedly has occurred when PW01

has returned from school and no other family member was present in

the house.

5. This alleged abuse has occurred repeatedly. When PW01 could no

longer endure the situation, she has informed her mother, PW02.

Subsequently, a complaint has been filed with the police and

investigation begun.

6. As a part of the investigation, PW01 has been examined by Dr. N.A.S.P.

Wijerathna, a consultant Judicial Medical Officer, and the resulting

medicolegal report (marked P2) has been produced as evidence.

Case of the Appellant

7. The appellant has maintained that he did not engage in penile-vaginal

penetration with PW01 as described.

Grounds of Appeal

8. When the matter was taken up for argument the learned counsel

appearing on behalf of the appellant urged the following grounds of

appeal;

5

I. The learned High Court Judge convicted the accused based on

the uncorroborated evidence of the first witness.

II. The learned High Court Judge has misinterpreted the medico-

legal report when arriving at his order.

III. The learned High Court Judge has failed to appreciate that the

prosecution has failed to establish the charges beyond a

reasonable doubt.

9. The learned counsel for the appellant has maintained that the

prosecution has not sufficiently discharged its burden of proof based

on the fact that it neglected to present testimony from all identified

witnesses, i.e., PW02 and PW03. It is the contention of the appellant

that such omission has contributed to significant gaps in the evidence

presented, raising a reasonable doubt as to the appellant’s guilt.

10. Section 134 of the Evidence Ordinance No. 14 of 1895 reads as follows:

“No particular number of witnesses shall in any case be required

for the proof of any fact.”

11. The primary implication of Section 134 of the Evidence Ordinance is

the adoption of the principle that “evidence must not be counted but

weighed”. This has several key consequences in the Sri Lankan legal

system. A court can convict an accused or determine a case solely on

the uncorroborated evidence of a single witness provided that the judge

finds that witness to be cogent, credible, trustworthy and impressive.

12. The law does not require corroboration of witness’s testimony as an

essential condition for a conviction. The trial Judge has the discretion

to rely on the testimony if satisfied with its veracity after careful

6

probing. The emphasis is shifted from a mere head count of witnesses

to a careful judicial analysis and evaluation of the witness’s demeanour,

consistency, and overall trustworthiness of his testimony.

13. In Sumanasena v Attorney General [1999] 3 SLR 137, Jayasuriya J. has

held as follows:

“Evidence must not be counted but weighed and the evidence of a single

solitary witness if cogent and impressive could be acted upon by a Court

of law.”

14. In the present case, PW01 has testified, in detail, about the penile-

vaginal intercourse, involving the appellant.

“Q: Thamizhini according to your evidence, you said that you were lying

with face upwards in the entrance of the corridor and at that time, your

father had asked you to remove the dress. What did your father do

thereafter?

A: He asked me to lie down and slept on me.

Q: On which direction was your father’s face at that time?

A: He was facing my face.

Q: you said your father inserted his male organ. Did you see his male

organ going into your female organ or did you feel it?

A: I felt it.”

Vide Page 110 of the translated Brief

15. Furthermore, in her short history provided to Dr. Wijerathna, PW01 has

stated as follows;

7

Vide page 513 of the Brief

Hence, it is clear that PW01 has been clear and consistent in her

narrative. The testimony of PW01 is cogent and creditworthy in that

regard.

16. Following his examination of PW01, Dr. Wijerathna has observed that

there was attenuation of the hymen as well as dilation of the vaginal

orifice. He has then opined as follows;

“There is medical evidence of probable previous vaginal

penetration.”

Vide page 514 of the Brief

Such observations and the conclusion stand as corroboration of PW01’s

narrative with regard to the core details of the incident involving the

appellant.

17. It is argued that a criminal charge must always state the precise time

of the alleged offence. However, while the precise time should be

included whenever possible, it is not absolutely necessary in every case.

The true purpose of a charge is to provide the accused with adequate

notice of the allegation so that a defence can be prepared and the trial

remains fair.

8

18. Further, Section 165(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of

1979 reads as follows;

“The charge shall contain such particulars as to the time and place of

the alleged offence and as to the person (if any) against whom and as

to the thing (if any) in respect of which it was committed as are

reasonably sufLicient to give the accused notice of the matter with

which he is charged and to show that the offence is not prescribed.”

19. In many offences, the exact time may not be known and requiring it

would encourage artificial precision and lead to technical dismissals. In

many cases, such as repeated abuse over several months, a victim may

be able to describe the events and context but not the exact time. If the

law demanded a specific time, regardless of the circumstances, it would

either force the prosecution to speculate or prevent legitimate cases

from being tried at all. Therefore, what matters is not precision for its

ow sake, but whether the charge provides sufficient notice to ensure a

fair trial.

20. Therefore, the law usually allows a reasonable margin of variants,

provided the core elements of the charge are proven, and the defence is

not prejudiced. For most offences, (e.g.; assault, theft and sexual

offences) the exact date is not an essential ingredient of the offence. The

prosecution is only required to prove that the offence occurred generally

within the time, and before the charges were filed. If the exact date is

unknown, stating “on or about” a specific date, or providing a time

period between two specific dates, is legally valid.

21. However, the prosecution must establish the exact date or a precise

timeframe in specific situations;

I. If time or age is a material ingredient of the offence.

9

II. If the defence raises a complete alibi for the exact time alleged,

the prosecution cannot arbitrarily shift the timeline to convict.

22. In the matter at hand, the precise timing of the alleged offence is not

considered an essential component of the charge the appellant faces. In

the case of Maarukku Kankanamalage Anura Kumarasiri Vs. The

Attorney General CA/0036/2020, decided on 11.06.2024, Sampath B.

Abeykoon J, held as follows;

“The above mentioned relevant statutory provisions clearly stipulate

the purpose of mentioning the date of an offence and other particulars

is to give sufLicient notice to any accused person as to the charge

against him and for the purposes of showing the offence has not been

prescribed. Any omission or error in giving the required particulars in

a charge becomes material only if such error or omission has caused

the accused to be misled as to the charge or charges preferred against

him.”

23. In her testimony, PW01 has identified the rough timeline of when the

incidents occurred as follows;

“Q: You said the incident happened in the year 2016. Do you remember

the year and the month?

A: No.

Q: If you had given in your complaint of this case stating that the

incident happened in the year of 2015, is it correct?

A: Yes.”

Vide Page 105 of the translated Brief

10

24. Accordingly, the exact date of the alleged offence not being established

does not lend towards the contention that the prosecution has failed to

establish the appellant’s guilt, beyond a reasonable doubt.

25. Furthermore, the case at hand involves a young girl who experienced

the incident at the age of 12 years and provided testimony seven years

later. The complexities of recalling events from a young age pose

challenges, including potential for inconsistencies and exaggeration.

26. To begin with, it is crucial to acknowledge the psychological aspects of

memory. Children possess cognitive faculties that are still developing.

Children experience difficulties in accurately recalling events, especially

those that are traumatic or extraordinary. As years pass the details may

become increasingly blurred, influenced by various factors, such as

discussions with peers, media exposure, or even parental input. The

likelihood of inconsistencies creeping into the testimony becomes

significant as memories are not fixed but rather, can evolve over time.

Hence, it is reasonable to expect a child’s account of an event to contain

inaccuracies, particularly several years later.

27. It is essential to consider the context in which these narratives are

made. The child may not remember specific details or may exaggerate

his/her narrative but may still convey the core truth of an incident.

Courts must evaluate whether the inconsistencies affect the substance

of the testimony, or if they pertain to peripheral details that do not alter

the fundamental truth of what has transpired.

28. Placing undue emphasis on minor inconsistencies risks undermining

the very essence of justice. It is vital for the judicial system to remain

accessible and fair to vulnerable populations, such as children. If

Courts were to dismiss the entire testimony of a child witness based on

minor inconsistencies, it could deter future witnesses from coming

forward.

11

29. While alleged inconsistencies and exaggeration in the testimony of

PW01 warrant careful consideration, they should not automatically

invalidate her account. Especially, when such discrepancies are not

material to the core of her account.

30. In regard to the matter at hand, the discrepancies in PW01’s testimony

relate to the location within the house, in which the incident took place,

i.e. in a temporary structure, or a corridor. This Court deems such

discrepancies not to be fundamental to PW01’s testimony as they only

relate to peripheral details, and consequently, are not material.

Moreover, PW01 has maintained consistency regarding the core

incidents involving the appellant, specifically the penile-vaginal

intercourse committed on PW01.

31. In the case of R v B [2010] EWCA Crim 4 The Lord Chief Justice of

England and Wales held as follows;

“We emphasise that in our collective experience the age of a witness is

not determinative on his or her ability to give truthful and accurate

evidence. Like adults some children will provide truthful and accurate

testimony, and some will not. However, children are not miniature

adults, but children, and to be treated and judged for what they are, not

what they will, in years ahead, grow to be. Therefore, although due

allowance must be made in the trial process for the fact that they are

children with, for example, a shorter attention span than most adults,

none of the characteristics of childhood, and none of the special

measures which apply to the evidence of children carry with them the

implicit stigma that children should be deemed in advance to be

somehow less reliable than adults. The purpose of the trial process is to

identify the evidence which is reliable and that which is not, whether it

comes from an adult or a child.”

12

32. Further, in the case of AG v. Daradadagamage Chandraratne,

CA/85/2013, decided on 25.05.2018, S. Thurairaja PC, J, held as

follows,

“Time and again Courts have discussed the acceptance of evidence of

children of tender ages. Our Judges are not there to test the memory of

the witness, they are expected to Lind the actual fact and the truth.

Witnesses are human being, they are not memory machines nor robots

to repeat the incident as it was. Further the natural behaviour of

human beings is to forget incidents, especially sad memories. No one

wants to re- visit painful moments and keep detailed memories with

them. We are also mindful most of our courts, with due respect, are not

child friendly. In this case a child giving evidence after 8 years and

subjected to cross examination more than 3 years is sufLicient to create

certain contradictions in her testimony. It is human nature.”

33. Section 114(f) of the Evidence Ordinance No. 14 of 1895 provides as

follows;

“The court may presume the existence of any fact which it thinks likely

to have happened, regard being had to the common course of natural

events, human conduct, and public and private business in their

relation to the facts of the particular case.

Illustrations

The Court may presume-”

(f) that evidence which could be and is not produced would if produced,

be unfavourable to the person who withholds it;”

34. This illustration deals with the presumption which arises from

withholding evidence. If evidence could have been introduced but has

13

not been produced by a party, the natural presumption is that the

evidence, if produced, would have been unfavourable to the party

withholding it. Adverse inference from non-production of evidence is

one of the strongest presumptions known to law, and the law allows it

against the party who, by his tortuous acts, withholds the evidence by

which the nature of his case would be manifested.

35. However, the Section does not in all cases, make it obligatory on the

court to act on such a presumption because, a particular case may be

such that, notwithstanding that there is intentional non-production,

other circumstances may be present upon which such intentional non-

production may be justifiable, on some reasonable grounds, or may be

attributable to some justifiable cause. The illustration itself says that

Court shall have regard to other facts in considering whether the maxim

does or does not apply to any particular case. Where however, there is

sufficient explanation for non-production there can be no adverse

presumption.

36. In this case, PW02 has not been a witness to the incidents at hand, but

as the mother of PW01 has been informed by PW01 about the incidents

involving the appellant. Therefore, the testimony of PW02, would have

simply served the purpose of corroborating or disproving PW01’s

narrative, as regards to her informing PW02 about the incidents

involving the appellant, as opposed to providing a vital missing link in

the prosecution’s case. Hence, it does not entitle the Court to draw an

adverse presumption on the basis of PW02 not being called to testify

before the High Court.

37. Due to the matters discussed above, I am not inclined to interfere with

the conviction, judgement and the sentencing order imposed on the

appellant and proceed to affirm the same.

38. I dismiss the appeal but make no order regarding costs.

14

Appeal dismissed.

39. The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this Judgement to the

High Court of Vavuniya for compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Dr. Sumudu Premachandra, J.

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal