==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/PHC/0044/2019

Page 1 of 14

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under and in terms of Article 154(P)6 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka read with Section 11 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990.

Weerakkody Appuhamillage Sarath Hemachandra Weerakkody, Kelagama - Napawala, Avissawella.

Plaintiff Vs.

1. Registrar of the Co-operative Societies

of theSabaragamuwa Province, Department of Co-operative Development, New Town - Ratnapura. 2. Kapila Perera,

Cooperative Development Commissioner and Registrar (Acting), Department of Co-operative Development, Sabaragamuwa Provincial Council, New town - Ratnapura. 3. P. A. Podinilame,

Cooperative Development Commissioner and Registrar (Acting), Department of Co-operative Development, New town - Ratnapura.

Court of Appeal Case No: CA(PHC)0044/2019 High Court Case No: රිට් 5027

CA/PHC/0044/2019

Page 2 of 14

4. Yatiyanthota Multipurpose Co-operative

Society Ltd, Yatiyanthota. 5. W. G. Kamalawathie,

Chairman of the Arbitration Panel, No. 9/4 Athiyagala Road - Athurapana, Pitihuma - Kegalle. 6. W. Karunathilaka,

Member of the Arbitration Panel, Doranuwa-Ruwanwella. 7. S. A. G. Samaraweera,

Member of the Arbitration Panel, Morawaka-Nelundeniya.

Respondents AND BETWEEN

Weerakkody Appuhamillage Sarath Hemachandra Weerakkody, Kelagama - Napawala, Avissawella.

Petitioner-Appellant Vs. 1. Registrar of the Co-operative Societies

of the Sabaragamuwa Province, Department of Co-operative Development, New Town - Ratnapura.

CA/PHC/0044/2019

Page 3 of 14

2. Kapila Perera,

Cooperative Development Commissioner and Registrar (Acting), Department of Co-operative Development, Sabaragamuwa Provincial Council, New town - Ratnapura. 3. P. A. Podinilame,

Cooperative Development Commissioner and Registrar (Acting), Department of Co-operative Development, New town - Ratnapura. 4. Yatiyanthota Multipurpose Co-operative

Society Ltd, Yatiyanthota. 5. W. G. Kamalawathie,

Chairman of the Arbitration Panel, No. 9/4 Athiyagala Road - Athurapana, Pitihuma - Kegalle. 6. W. Karunathilaka,

Member of the Arbitration Panel, Doranuwa-Ruwanwella. 7. S. A. G. Samaraweera,

Member of the Arbitration Panel, Morawaka-Nelundeniya.

Respondent-Respondents Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J. K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J. Counsel : Pubudu de Silva instructed by Manju S. Chandrasena for the Appellant.

CA/PHC/0044/2019

Page 4 of 14

Abigail Jayakody, S.C. for the 1st to 3rd

Respondents Darshana Kuruppu with Tharushi Gamage for the 4th Respondent. 5th to 7th Respondents are absent and are unrepresented. Argued on : 28.08.2025 Written Submissions of the Petitioner -Appellant tendered on : 11.01.2024 and 07.10.2025 Written Submissions of the 1st to 3rd Respondent -Respondents tendered on : 18.07.2024 Written Submissions of the 4th Respondent -Respondent tendered on : 18.10.2024 Decided on : 19.12.2025 K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Instant appeal arises from a judgement dated 28.02.2019 made by the learned

High Court Judge of the Sabaragamuwa Province holden at Kegalle in the case

bearing No. රිට් 5027 (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Judgement’)

dismissing an application made thereto by the Petitioner-Appellant (hereinafter

called and referred to as ‘the Appellant’) against the 1st to 4th Respondent-

Respondents (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th

Respondent’) praying for a mandate in the nature of a writ of certiorari against

CA/PHC/0044/2019

Page 5 of 14

the 2nd Respondent to quash the decision dated 30.12.2015, made by him in

appeal preferred to him by the Appellant from an arbitral award under and in

terms of the provisions of section 58 of the Co-operative Societies Statute of

the Provincial Council of Sabaragamuwa Province No. 03 of 2007 (hereinafter

called and referred to as ‘the Statute’) and contained in ‘පෙ12’.

The facts and circumstances relevant and material to the instant appeal as can

be gathered from the record, may be briefly, set out as follows;

The Appellant had at all times material to the instant application, been

employed as a manager of a Co-op City Supermarket of the 4th Respondent;

and that, the 4th Respondent had by the letter of demand dated 25.11.2010

(පෙ4), demanded a sum of Rs. 1185275.31/- from the Appellant for shortage of

goods entrusted to him in the said capacity during his period of service as a

manager of a Co-op City Supermarket of the 4th Respondent, for shortage of

cash and festival advance which demand had been rejected by the Appellant;

and that the 4th Respondent had then, referred the dispute to the 1st

Respondent for arbitration who had in turn, appointed the 5th, 6th and 7th

Respondents as an arbitral panel to arbitrate the dispute so arisen between the

4th Respondent and the Appellant; and that consequent to an inquiry held by

the arbitral panel consisting of the 5th, 6th and 7th Respondents, they had made

their arbitral award (පෙ5) by which the Appellant was held liable to pay the 4th

Respondent a sum of Rs. 1027838.52/-; and that being aggrieved by the said

arbitral award, the Appellant had then, preferred an appeal to the 1st

Respondent against the arbitral award and deposited Rs.10,000.00/- as

security deposit together therewith under and in terms of section 58(3) of the

Statute; and that the 3rd Respondent had by his letter dated 14.04.2012 (පෙ10)

asked the Appellant to furnish further details in relation to his appeal and in

response, the Appellant had sent a letter through registered post to the 3rd

Respondent on 2012.05.12 (පෙ11), challenging the notification so sent to him

by the 3rd Respondent (පෙ10) on the premise that it was null and illegal for; the

CA/PHC/0044/2019

Page 6 of 14

appellate power vested in the 1st Respondent under section 58(5) of the Statute

could not be delegated to the 3rd Respondent; and that notwithstanding the

challenge so raised by the Appellant to the vires of the notice (පෙ10), the 2nd

Respondent had without summoning the parties and not giving them a

hearing, informed the Appellant of his decision taken in appeal, by the letter

dated 30.12.2015 (පෙ12) that he had acting in appeal, decided to amend the

arbitral award (පෙ5) and accordingly, asked him to pay the 4th Respondent in a

sum of Rs. 1077832.23/- on or before 27.02.2016; and that being aggrieved by

the decision of the 2nd Respondent (පෙ12), the Appellant had made an

application to the High Court of the Sabaragamuwa Province holden at Kegalle

(hereinafter called and referred to as the High Court of the Province) on the

grounds urged in paragraph 17 (අ), (ආ) and (ඇ) of his application praying for a

mandate in the nature of writ of certiorari against the 2nd Respondent to quash

the decision dated 30.12.2015, made by him in appeal preferred to him by the

Appellant from an arbitral award under and in terms of the provisions of

section 58 of the Statute (පෙ12); and that the learned High Court Judge of

Kegalle had by his order dated 28.02.2019, dismissed the application by

holding that the Appellant had not established his position adverted to therein

before Court; and that being aggrieved by the aforesaid decision of the High

Court of the Province, the instant appeal had been preferred therefrom to this

Court by the Appellant on the grounds of appeal morefully, set out in

paragraph 18 (අ) to (ඈ) of the petition of appeal among any other grounds of

appeal that may be urged by counsel at the hearing of this appeal and they

may be re-produced verbatim the same as follows;

“(අ) අභියාචකපේ ඉල්ලීම හා සම්බන්ධිත නීතිය නිසි ෙරිදි සැලකිල්ලලට පනාපෙන ෙරිොලන කටයුක්තක් පලස සදහන්ධ කර බැහැර කර ඇත.

(ආ) අභියාචකපේ ඉල්ලීම සම්බන්ධධ ආණ්ඩුක්‍රම ව්‍යව්‍ස්ථා නීතිය, ෙළාත් සභා නිතිය සහ ෙැසට් නිපේදන සම්බන්ධධපයන්ධ සලකා බලා පනාමැත.

(ඇ) එපමන්ධම විනිශ්චය අිකාරයකට බලයක් පනාමැතිව්‍ කරනු ලබන නිපයෝෙයක ව්‍ලංගු තාව්‍ය පිළිබද කිසිදු සදහනක් පනාමැත.

CA/PHC/0044/2019

Page 7 of 14

(ඈ) ස්ව්‍භාවික යුක්ති මුලධමම අනුව්‍ ව්‍ෙඋත්තරකරුව්‍න්ධ කටයුතු කර ඇති බව්‍ට ව්‍ැරදි නිෙමයකට ෙැමිණීම.”

Literal translation of the same into English reads thus;

“(a) The Appellant's appeal had been dismissed treating it as an

administrative matter without giving due consideration to the law

relating to it;

(b) The Constitutional Law, Provincial Council Law and Gazette

Notifications relating to the Appellant's application had not been

considered;

(c) No mention as to the vires of a decision made by a tribunal without a

lawful authority;

(d) Arriving at an erroneous conclusion that the Respondents had acted

in accordance with the principles of natural justice.”

Since, the grounds of appeal so urged by the Appellant appear to be

interwoven, it would I think, be expedient and proper to consider them all

together in a consolidated manner.

Article 154G of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Constitution’) confers upon

every Provincial Council established under Article 154A of the Constitution

enacted by the 13th amendment to the Constitution, subject to the provisions of

the Constitution to make statutes applicable to the province for which it is

established, with respect to any matter set out in list I of the Ninth Schedule

which is referred to as the “Provincial Council List” and item 19 in the Ninth

Schedule thereto, being the subject of Co-operatives, the Sabaragamuwa

Provincial Council had by virtue of the powers so conferred upon it by the

Article 154G of the Constitution, enacted the Co-operative Societies Statute of

the Provincial Council of Sabaragamuwa Province of No. 3 of 2007.

CA/PHC/0044/2019

Page 8 of 14

Furthermore,the Provincial Councils Act No. 42 of 1987 as amended

(hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Act’) enacted by the Parliament to

provide for the procedure to be followed in Provincial Councils; for matters

relating to the provincial public service; and for matters connected therewith or

incidental thereto, enacts in its section 32(1), (2) and (2A) as follows;

“(1) Subject to the provisions of any other law the appointment, transfer,

dismissal and disciplinary control of officers of the provincial public

service of such Province is hereby vested in the Governor of that

Province.

(2) The Governor of a Province may, from time to time, delegate his

powers of appointment, transfer, dismissal and disciplinary control of

officers of the provincial public service to the Provincial Public Service

Commission of that Province.

(2A) The Provincial Public Service Commission of a province may, subject

to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Government of that

Province, delegate to the Chief Secretary or any officer of the provincial

public service of that Province, its powers of appointment, transfer,

dismissal, and disciplinary control of officers of the provincial public

service.

Moreover, the Act in its section 33(1) enacts that,

“(1) There shall be a Provincial Public Service Commission for each

Province which shall consist of not less than three persons appointed by

the Governor of that, Province. The Governor shall nominate one of the

members 'of the Commission to be the Chairman”.

Upon a careful consideration of sections 32(1),(2), (2A) and 33(1) of the Act in

its totality makes it abundantly, clear without an iota of doubt that the power

so vested in the Governor of that Province with regard to the appointment,

transfer, dismissal and disciplinary control of officers of the provincial public

CA/PHC/0044/2019

Page 9 of 14

service may from time to time,be delegated to the Provincial Public Service

Commission of that Province so established by section 33(1) of the Act; and

that, that Provincial Public Service Commission of a province may subject to

the conditions as may be prescribed by the Government of that Province,

delegate to the Chief Secretary or any officer of the Provincial Public Service

Commission its powers of appointment, transfer, dismissal, and disciplinary

control of officers of the Provincial Public Service.

Upon a careful scrutiny of the letter dated 27.02.2012, annexed to the joint

statement of objections of the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 5th, 6th and 7th Respondents marked

as ‘ව්‍2’ andfiled in the High Court of the Province, it becomes manifestly, clear

that the Secretary to the Provincial Public Service Commission of the

Sabaragamuwa Province had thereby, (ව්‍2) informed the 3rd Respondent that he

had by order of the Provincial Public Service Commission of the Sabaragamuwa

Province, been appointed with immediate effect to cover up the duties

pertaining to the Co-operative Development Commissioner/ Registrar of the

Sabaragamuwa Province until such time as permanent appointment may be

made thereto.

Also, It becomes manifestly, clear upon a careful scrutiny of the letter dated

01.09.2014, annexed to the joint statement of objections of the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 5th,

6th and 7th Respondents marked as ‘ව්‍1’ filed in the High Court of the Province,

that the Secretary to the Provincial Public Service Commission of the

Sabaragamuwa Province had thereby, (ව්‍1) appointed with effect from

01.09.2014, the 2nd Respondent to act as the Co-operative Development

Commissioner of the Sabaragamuwa Province in terms of the letter of the Chief

Secretary of that province bearing No. CS 1513 එ/VI and dated 28.08.2014.

Applying the presumption of regularity arising out of illustration “d” of section

114 of the evidence ordinance which enacts that; “The court may presume the

existence of any fact which it thinks likely to have happened, regard being had

to the common course of natural events, human conduct, and public and

CA/PHC/0044/2019

Page 10 of 14

private business in their relation to the facts of the particular case. (d) the

judicial and official acts have been regularly performed;” that it is

presumed in law that the Secretary to the Provincial Public Service

Commission of the Sabaragamuwa Province had by the letters of appointment

marked as ව්‍1 and ව්‍2, made those two appointments appointing the 3rd and the

2nd Respondent to the respective positions mentioned therein and with effect

from the date as stipulated by order of the Provincial Public Service

Commission of Sabaragamuwa Province upon whom the power of appointment

of those two public officers had duly, been conferred by the Governor of the

Sabaragamuwa Province by virtue of the powers vested in him by section 32(2)

of the Act.

Since, this is a rebuttable presumption, the burden of proof will solely, lie on a

person who would assert on the contrary. However, it is significant to observe

that the Appellant had not in any manner, even made an attempt to rebut this

presumption of regularity so arising out of illustration “d” of Section 114 of the

Evidence Ordinance by proof on the contrary. Hence, it remains unchallenged

and uncontroverted.[Emphasis is mine]

Moreover, section 2 of the Statute enacts thus;

“(1)There may be appointed a Registrar of Co-operative Societies for

Sabaragamuwa Province of Sri Lanka thereof and such number or

Deputy, Senior Assistant or Assistant, Registrars as maybe necessary.

(2) The Provincial Minister may, by general or special order, confer on

any Deputy, Senior Assistant or Assistant registrar all or any of the

powers of a Registrar under this Statute or under any rules made

thereunder.

(3) The person appointed to be, or to act for the time being as, the

commissioner of Co-operative, Development, shall have and may exercise

the same powers as are vested in the Registrar of Co-operative Societies

CA/PHC/0044/2019

Page 11 of 14

by this Statute and by any rules made under or deemed to be made

thereunder.

(4) Each of the persons appointed to assist the Commissioner of Co-

operative Development shall have and may exercise such of the powers of

the Registrar under this statute and under any rules made or deemed to

be made thereunder as may be specified by the Provincial Registrar in

any general or special order made under this section.”

It is to be observed that, in terms of Section 2(3) of the Statute, the person

appointed to be, or to act for the time being as, the commissioner of Co-

operative, Development-the 3rd Respondent to the instant application in this

instance, shall have and may exercise the same powers as are vested in the

Registrar of Co-operative Societies by the Statute and by any rules made under

or deemed to be made thereunder.

Upon a careful analysis of Section 2 of the Statute, Section 2(3) and (4) thereof,

in particular, read together with Section 32 (2) of the Act, it becomes

abundantly, clear without an iota of doubt that the 2nd and 3rd Respondents

had duly, been appointed by the Provincial Public Service Commission of

Sabaragamuwa Province by virtue of the powers conferred upon it by the

Governor of the Sabaragamuwa Province by virtue of the powers vested in him

by Section 32(2) of the Act to act in the capacity of the Registrar/ Co-operative

Development Commissioner of the Sabaragamuwa Province.

In the circumstances, it clearly, appears that the act of the 3rd Respondent

which culminated in the issuance of the notification calling for detailed report

from the Appellant with regard to his appeal as manifest from the

communication annexed to the Petition filed by the Appellant in the High Court

along with his application marked as “පෙ10” and the decision made by the 2nd

Respondent pursuant to the appeal preferred to him by the Appellant from the

arbitral award (පෙ12) which decision was sought to be quashed by the

CA/PHC/0044/2019

Page 12 of 14

Appellant in the said application, were acts/decisions made by both of them,

namely; the 3rd and the 2nd Respondent to the instant appeal, acting solely

within the powers vested in each of them as enumerated above, and therefore,

both of those acts/decisions (පෙ10) and (පෙ12) respectively, made by the 3rd and

2nd Respondents to the instant appeal, were acts/decisions (පෙ10) and (පෙ12)

which were intra-vires of the powers so vested in each of them and they are

therefore, entirely, lawful and justifiable.

Upon a careful perusal of the decision (පෙ12) sought to be quashed in his

application before the High Court of the Province by the Appellant in its totality

and in its correct perspective, it is abundantly, clear that the 2nd Respondent

had made his decision in appeal (පෙ12) upon a careful consideration of the

appeal so preferred to him by the Appellant (පෙ10) as well as the further details

so called for by the 3rd Respondent in his capacity as the then, Acting

Registrar/ Co-operative Development Commissioner (පෙ11) from the Appellant

thus, affording him a reasonable opportunity to be heard in support of his

appeal in writing as empowered by section 58 (5) of the Statute thereby,

properly, adhering to, and complying with the principles of natural justice as

laid down by Court in the decision in Colombo South Multipurpose Co-

operative Society Ltd Vs. Co-operative Employee’s Commission 1997 [2] SLR

225.

In view of the foregoing, I would hold that the appeal is not in any manner,

entitled to succeed both in fact and law on any of the grounds of appeal so

urged by the Appellant as enumerated above and therefore, the appeal cannot

sustain both in fact and law.

It was contended by the 4th Respondent that appeal should be dismissed in-

limine as the Appellant had not prayed for a writ of certiorari to quash the

arbitral award made by the 5th to 7th Respondents (පෙ5) for; under the

circumstances, granting of a writ of certiorari to quash only the decision made

by the 2nd Respondent in appeal (පෙ12) would become futile inasmuch as

CA/PHC/0044/2019

Page 13 of 14

granting of a writ of certiorari to quash only the decision of the 2nd Respondent

in appeal (පෙ12) without quashing the arbitral award (පෙ5) would serve no

purpose.

It may now, be examined.

It was observed by this Court in CA/WRIT/ 591/2021-Decided on 12.01.2024

that, “After reviewing all such authorities of higher courts, I take the view that

the Writ Court is not mandatorily bound to refuse an Application if it observes

that (a). granting a Writ would not be needful to remedy the grievances of the

Applicant, (b). no purpose is served by issuing a writ.

None of those previous judgements have expressly curtailed the discretion of

the Review Court but have only implied that the Court, under usual

circumstances, should not issue a Writ if the result would be a futility. How the

court should exercise its discretion upon an objection on futility should be

decided based on the facts and circumstances of each case, for the best

interest of justice, without restricting its jurisdiction to a rigid rule as such.”

In the instant application, the Appellant had in prayer “ආ” of his petition filed

in the High Court of the Province had only sought a writ of certiorari to quash

only the decision made by the 2nd Respondent in appeal (පෙ12) only on the

grounds urged in paragraph 17 “අ” , “ආ”, “ඇ” of his petition, all of which were

given a detailed consideration by this Court herein before in this Judgement.

In the circumstances, even, if, it is to be assumed for the sake of the argument

for a moment that writ of certiorari is issued by the High Court of the Province

quashing only the decision made by the 2nd Respondent in appeal (පෙ12), yet,

the liability to pay the amount specified in the arbitral award (පෙ5) would still,

be on the Appellant in the absence of further order for a mandate in the nature

of a writ of certiorari to quash the arbitral award (පෙ5).

Hence, it becomes abundantly, clear that under those circumstances

enumerated above, the mere issuance of writ of certiorari to quash only the

CA/PHC/0044/2019

Page 14 of 14

decision made by the 2nd Respondent in appeal (පෙ12) would become futile and

therefore, it would serve no purpose whatsoever, inasmuch as the liability to

pay the amount specified in the arbitral award (පෙ5) would still, be on the

Appellant notwithstanding the issuance of a writ of certiorari by the High Court

of the Province to quash only the decision made by the 2nd Respondent in

appeal (පෙ12).

I would therefore, hold that the contention so advanced by the learned Counsel

for the 4th Respondent is entitled to succeed in law and as such it should be

upheld.

In view of the foregoing, I am in total agreement with the judgement of the

learned High Court Judge of the Province.

I would thus, proceed to dismiss the appeal with costs of this Court and below.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J. I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL