IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

1

In the matter of an application for mandate in

the nature of a writ of Certiorari and

Prohibition under Article 140 of the

Constitution, of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

K.M.R. Sanjeewa Kumara,

No. 464/A,

Gangasiri pura,

Debarawewa,

Thissamaharamaya.

Petitioner

Case No: CAIWRIT/l63/2015 Vs.

1. Air Marshal Harsha Abeywickrama,

1A. Air Marshal Gagan Pulasthi Bulathsinhala,

lB. Air Marshal Kapila Jayampathy,

Commander of the Sri Lanka Air Force,

Air Force Head Quarters,

Colombo 02.

2. Squadron Leader M.D.A. Weerasuriya,

Commanding Officer,

Air Force Camp,

Weerawila.

Before

Counsel

Argued on

3. Air Commodore DJ.C. Weerakoon,

3A. Air Commodore M.DJ. Wasaga.

Commanding Officer,

Air Force Camp,

Weerawila.

4. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 02.

Respondents

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

Nuwan Bopage with Chathura Weththasinghe for the Petitioner.

Maithree Amarasinghe, S.C. for the Respondents.

01/1112017

Written Submission on 02/02/2018

Judgment on: 1010512018

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

2

The Petitioner, has invoked the jurisdiction of this court seeking inter alia. a

mandate in the nature of a writ of Certiorari to quash the decision of the 1 st

Respondent to discharge the Petitioner from the Sri Lanka Air Force by the

impugned document marked X9, and to re-instate the Petitioner with back wages.

The Petitioner contends that the decision to discharge the Petitioner from the Sri

3

Lanka Air Force by the 1 sr, 2nd and 3rd Respondents are unreasonable, malicious

and bad in law.

The Respondents in their statement of objections, have taken up a

preliminary objection that the Petitioner has misrepresented and has also

suppressed vital material facts, in order to mislead court. The Respondents state

that the impugned decision by the 1 st Respondent to terminate the services of the

Petitioner was taken not only in consideration of the case at hand but also

considering the gross continuous ill-discipline of the Petitioner as manifested by

the multiple acts of misconduct exhibited in documents marked Rl to R6.

In support of the above contention the Respondents submit that;

(a) multiple grounds of misconduct by the Petitioner including fraud has been

deliberately with held from pleadings, which justify the decision taken by

the said Respondents.

(b) a distorted interpretation has been given to the witness statement of Air-

women Sanjeewa in order to mislead court.

and submit that the said misinterpretation and misconduct of the Petitioner

justifies the dismissal of this application.

In the circumstances, I wish to deal with the said preliminary objection to

this application before dealing with the merits of the case.

4

In paragraph 2, of the counter objections filed of record, the Petitioner has

denied the paragraphs which contains the averments relating to previous

misconduct. However, in the same paragraph, the Petitioner admits of previous

offences where he has been found guilty. The Petitioner admits to the acts of

misconduct embodied in the said documents, and further state that, the incidents

related to the said offences took place 15 years ago, and were not serious in nature.

The Petitioner has failed to disclose any reason for the non disclosure of the said

incidents of misconduct at the time of filing the Petition.

In paragraph 8, of the statement of objections the Respondents have in

detail examined the statement given by Air-women Sanjeewa marked X 1. While

admitting that the said Air-women pleaded guilty to fraud as charged, the

Respondents have demonstrated to court, the extent to which the Petitioner has

indulged himself to mislead court, by misinterpreting the contents of the said

statement. In paragraph 12, the Petitioner states that, Air-women Sujeewa in her

statement stated that she prepared the fraudulent formats pertaining to the

fraudulent statements and the Petitioner did not participate in the preparation of

the said formats. However, as observed in document marked Xl, tendered by the

Petitioner, Air-women Sanjeewa strongly implicates the Petitioner in the

preparation of the said fraudulent statements. Accordingly, the Petitioner has

failed to address his stand on this issue in his pleadings, other than a total denial of

his participation.

states;

5

Judicial Remedies in Public Law, Clive Lewis (5th Ed.) at page 415.

"Misconduct in the course of judicial review proceedings, such as

failing to make material disclosure of all the facts in an affidavit or

witness statement may well lead to the court refusing to grant that

claimant any remedy. Even inadvertent mis-statement offact is a reason

for refusing a remedy as claimant is required to show care (as well as

candour) in a judicial review claim. "

The document marked X9, pleaded in paragraph 2, refers to the fact that.

the 15t Respondent in arriving at the impugned decision has considered various

previous acts of misconduct and punishments given to the Petitioner. However,

document marked X9, makes no reference whatsoever, to such acts of misconduct

or punishment. When such incriminating facts pertaining to misbehavior stair in

the face, the Petitioner, chooses not to disclose such facts and ignore making any

reference in reply to such allegations in his affidavit. However, once brought to his

notice, the Petitioner has admitted previous fraudulent conduct without giving any

acceptable reason for non-disclosure of such material in the first instance.

In the case of Alphonso Appuhamy Vs. Hettiarachchi (1973) 77NLR 131,

the court held, that;

"if a material fact contained in a document is not expressly referred to

in the Petition and affidavit, the Petitioner is guilty of suppression of the

material fact, even if that document it self is filed along with that

Petition and affidavit and the fact that the document is being so filed is

mentioned in the Petition and affidavit. "

6

The Petitioner in document marked X9, states that, on or about 24/07/2014,

the 3rd Respondent sent a letter to the Petitioner stating that, his service is no

longer necessary to the Sri Lanka Air Force. However, the Petitioner has

deliberately avoided a full disclosure of the contents of the said document and

thereby has with held incriminating evidence against the Petitioner, which clearly

amounts to a non-disclosure of material facts within the knowledge of the

Petitioner.

The next question to be looked into is whether, the Petitioner mislead the

court when he stated that, Air-women Sujeewa did not incriminate the Petitioner

of participating in the preparation of the fraudulent formats in respect of missing

goods from the 2nd Respondent supply division. As stated earlier, the Petitioners

involvement in the said fraudulent activity is clearly demonstrated by the contents

of the statement given by Air-women Sujeewa marked X9, which is relied upon by

the Petitioner to establish the contrary, ie that the Petitioner did not participate in

the preparation of the fraudulent formats. The Petitioner has not submitted any

material to show that the impugned document marked X9, should be held in his

favour. Plain reading of the said document clearly establishes an involvement of

the Petitioner in the making of such fraudulent documents, which the Petitioner

7

has failed to explain. Such conduct on the part of the Petitioner is contrary, inter

alia, to a full disclosure of all material facts.

In the case of Namunukula Plantations Limited Vs. Minister of Landa

and others 2012 lSLR 365, the court held;

"a person who approaches the court for grant of discretionary relief, to

which category an application for certiorari would undoubtedly belong,

has to come with clean hands, and should candidly disclose all the

material facts which has any bearing on the adjudication of the issues

raised. He owes a duty of utmost good faith (uberrimafides) to the court

to make a full and complete disclosure of all material facts and refrain

from concealing or suppressing any material fact within his knowledge

or which he could have known by exercising diligence expected of a

person of ordinary prudence. "

In the circumstances, I find that the Petitioner is guilty of suppression and

misrepresentation of material facts and therefore, the petition is dismissed with

costs fixed at Rs. 50,0001-.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL