IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Pulahinge Akman Rodrigo,

(deceased)

Pulahinge Punyawardena Rodrigo,

Pushpasiri, Koswatte,

Morontuduwa.

Plaintiff-Appellant

CASE NO: CA/249/2000/F

DC PANADURA CASE NO: 74/P

Vs.

1. Pulahinnage Edwin Rodrigo,

Koswatte, Morontuduwa, (deceased)

1A Nevil Arunashantha Rodrigo,

100A, Arunasiri, Koswatte,

Morontuduwa.

2. Pulahinnage Joslin Rodrigo,

3. Magoda Arachchilage Mangonona,

(deceased)

3A. Mogodaarachchige Ratnapala

Rodrigo,

4. Mogodaarachchige Wijepala Rodrigo,

5. Mogodaarachchige Ratnapala,

All of Koswatta, Moronthuduwa.

6. Mogodaarachchige Emalin Rodrigo,

Murutude, Haltota, (deceased)

6B Nandana, Haltota,

Moronthuduwa.

7. Mogodaarachchige Emalin Rodrigo,

2

8. Eugene Rodrigo,

8A Pulahinnage Ratnapala Rodrigo,

(Legal Representative of the

Deceased 8th Defendant)

9. Pulahinnage Punyawardena

Rodrigo,

Pushpasiri, Koswatta,

Moronthuduwa.

10. Mastiyage Dona Agnes Gunatillaka,

11. Kanahela Mohandiramge Kingsley

Reginold Siriwardena,

Licensed Rubber Sales Point,

Moronthuduwa Road,

Bandaragama.

12. Kanhela Mohandiramge Vasantha

Gamini Siriwardena,

Kalutara Road, Moratuwa.

13. Jayalathge Saraneris, (deceased)

Moronthuduwa Junction,

Moronthuduwa.

13A Haturusinghe Arachchige Ekmon

Perera,

(Legal Representative of the

Deceased 13th Defendant)

14. Haturusinghe Arachchige Ekmon

Perera, (deceased)

14A Athrusiri Arachchige Ranjith

Kusumsiri,

89/B, Morontuduwa.

15. Pulhinege Delin Rodrigo

Defendants-Respondents

3

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Ranjan Gooneratne for the Plaintiff-Appellant.

Ranjan Suwandaratne, P.C., for the 3A, 4, 5, 6A, 8A,

14A Defendant-Respondents.

Decided on: 02.10.2018

Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff filed this action in 1986 in the District Court of

Panadura seeking to partition a land known as Kurunduwatta

about two acres in extent according to the pedigree set out in the

plaint. The Preliminary Plan is Plan No. 537 (X). The 3rd, 5th-8th

defendants got Plan No. 2973 (3V1) prepared to depict the corpus

and set out a different pedigree in their statement of claim. After

trial, the learned District Judge accepted the Plan and pedigree of

the aforesaid defendants and ordered Interlocutory Decree to be

entered accordingly. It is against this Judgment dated 28.01.2000

the plaintiff has preferred this appeal.

There are two disputes: (a) corpus dispute and (b) pedigree dispute.

Let me first refer to the corpus dispute. After the Preliminary Plan

was prepared, the said defendants moved Court to issue another

commission to another surveyor to show the entire land as

described in the schedule to the plaint on the basis that the

Preliminary Plan does not depict the entire land.

According to the plaint, the land to be partitioned is about two

acres in extent and the Preliminary Plan depicts a land of 1A 1R

25.83P in extent. Alternative Plan No. 2973 depicts a land of 2A

0R 1.25P in extent. The District Judge in the Judgment has

accepted the alternative Plan.

4

This procedure is completely repugnant to the Partition Law, No.

21 of 1977, as amended.

At the trial, the Preliminary Plan and the Report have been marked

as X and X1 respectively through the evidence of the plaintiff

without any objection and without subject to proof.

The surveyor who prepared the alternative Plan No. 2973 has been

called by the said defendants to give evidence. He has categorically

stated to Court that he was not aware about a Preliminary Plan

prepared for the case and he saw the Preliminary Plan for the first

time while being in the witness box.

If the surveyor to whom commission was first issued to prepare the

Preliminary Plan could not locate the entire land by boundaries

and extent as described in the commission/plaint, he should have

reported it to Court and sought further instructions.

In Uberis v. Jayawardene1 Chief Justice Basnayake held that: "It is

the duty of a surveyor to whom a commission is issued to adhere

strictly to its terms and locate and survey the land he is

commissioned to survey. It is not open to him to survey any land

pointed out by one or more of the parties and prepare and submit to

the court the plan and report of such survey. If he is unable to locate

the land he is commissioned to survey, he should so report to the

court and ask for further instructions." Vide also Brampy Appuhamy

v. Menis Appuhamy2.

In the instant case the surveyor has not sought further

instructions and sent the Plan with the Report stating that the

land surveyed by him is in his opinion substantially the same as

1 (1959) 62 NLR 217 2 (1958) 60 NLR 337

5

the land sought to be partitioned as described in the schedule to

the plaintsection 18(1)(a)(iii) of the Partition Law.

This Plan and Report may, in terms of section 18(2) of the Partition

Law, be used as evidence of fact without further proof.

However the proviso to section 18(2) states that "Provided that the

court shall, on the application of any party to the action and on such

terms as may be determined by the court, order that the surveyor

shall be summoned and examined orally on any point or matter

arising on, or in connexion with, any such document or any

statement of fact therein or any relevant fact which is alleged by any

party to have been omitted therefrom."

Neither the contesting defendants nor the Court has thought it fit

to summon the court commissioner and examine orally on the

discrepancy of the extent either before or during the course of trial.

As I have already stated, at the trial, the Preliminary Plan and the

Report have been marked without any objection.

According to section 18(3) of the Partition Law, if the Court or a

party is not satisfied with the Preliminary Plan, steps can be taken

to issue a commission to the Surveyor-General to prepare a fresh

Plan; but there is no provision in the Partition Law to issue a

commission to another surveyor to prepare an alternative

Preliminary Plan.

In Fernando v. Perera3, the petitioner was not satisfied with the

Court Commissioner's Preliminary Plan and got another

commission issued to another surveyor to prepare a second

Preliminary Plan. At the trial, the Court accepted the

3 CALA 187/95 (DC Kalutara No.5848/P) decided on 02.10.1995

6

Commissioners Plan as the Preliminary Plan, and the petitioner

came before this Court by way of revision against it. Upholding the

order of the District Judge, Justice Ranaraja stated that: "Section

18 of the Partition Act provides for parties dissatisfied with the

Preliminary Plan prepared on commission issued by Court to make

an application for a commission to issue on the Surveyor-General.

The petitioner has not availed himself of this provision of law.

Similarly there is a provision in that section for a party to have a

surveyor who conducted the survey to be summoned to Court and

examined in any matter arising from the Preliminary Plan and

Report filed in Court. The petitioner has not had recourse to that

provision. Instead he had sought a fresh commission on another

surveyor to conduct a second preliminary survey which is not

permitted by law."

The District Judge made a fundamental error by accepting the

alternative Plan as the Preliminary Plan.

At this stage I must also mention that although the Judgment runs

into 34 pages, it merely contains repetition of evidence led at the

trial. There is no proper analysis of evidence, which is what is

expected from a Judge.

Apart from the legal barrier, I cannot understand why the learned

District Judge accepted the alternative Plan on facts. It appears

that the surveyor who prepared the alternative Plan has tried to

prepare a Plan showing two acres in extent as the plaint refers to a

land of that extent. Lot 3 of the alternative Plan (3V1) cannot in

my view form part of the corpus. If it forms part of the corpus, the

southern boundary of the corpus shall be Delgahawatta and the

road; and a part of the eastern boundary shall also be the road.

But there is no road in the southern or eastern boundaries

7

according to the plaint. Also, if Lot 3 was regarded part of the

corpus, I fail to understand why the portion of land between Lot 2

and Lot 3 was not considered as a part thereof.

Taking all the legal and factual circumstances into account, in

particular, the parties have already spent nearly 32 years on this

litigation and the main witnesses who have given evidence at the

trial and who could speak to the pedigree and extent of the land

are no more among the living, I direct that the land depicted in the

Preliminary Plan (X) shall be regarded as the land to be partitioned,

and the finding of the District Judge accepting the alternative Plan

(3V1) as depicting the land to be partitioned is set aside.

This leads me to consider the pedigree dispute. It is common

ground that the original owner of this land was Simon Rodrigo. It

is the case of the plaintiff that Simon Rodrigo had four children.

All the other defendants including the 1st defendant have taken up

the position that he had only three children. According to the

proceedings, at the time of giving evidence, the plaintiff was 75

years old, and his younger brother, the 1st defendant, was 72

years of old. The District Judge cannot be found fault with in

accepting the version of all the defendants in preference to that of

the plaintiff on that matter.

Learned counsel for the plaintiff referring to section 35 of the

Matrimonial Rights and Inheritance Ordinance, No.15 of 1876, as

amended, states that there is no evidence that the half share gifted

to Johanis by Deed P1 was released from collation and therefore on

the death of Simon Rodrigo, Johanis had no claim on the balance

half share. The certified copy of Deed P1 produced by the plaintiff

is not clear at all, but as far as I could read, it appears to me that

P1 is not a gift but an outright transfer.

8

For the aforesaid reasons, I affirm the Judgment of the District

Court subject to the variation that the land to be partitioned is the

land depicted in the Preliminary Plan (X) and not in the alternative

second Plan (3V1).

Let the parties bear their own costs of appeal.

Appeal partly allowed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal