IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRAIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Court of Appeal Case No : CA HC /159/2014

Ponnaiya Karthikaysu

12 Cross Street

Iruddipuram,

Batticaloa

Petitioner

Vs.

Hon Attorney General.

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents

C. A. No. 159/ 2014 H. C. Batticaloa Case No. 2410 / 2006

BEFORE S. Devika de L. Tennekoon ,J

S. Thurairaja P. C. J

COUNSEL T. Fernando for the 1st Accused - Appellant.

ARGUED &

DECIDED ON

S. Thurairaja P. C. J

Indika Mallawarachchi for the 2nd, 3rd and 4th

Accused - Appellants.

P. Kumararatnam, DSG for AG.

31.10.2017

Heard the submissions of the 1 st Accused Appellant and the Counsel for the

2nd 3rd & 4th Accused Appellants and the Learned Deputy Solicitor General.

Counsel for the accused Appellant frames 6 grounds of appeal, and made

submissions on those grounds of appeal. We consider all these grounds of

appeal very carefu111y.

1. Has the Judge has misdirected herself in identifying the Penal Section in

the first ground. As per the indictment the Tamil and the Sinhala

indictments submitted to the Court stipulates that the 1 st Accused

1

Appellant was charged under Section 354 of the Penal Code. But the

Learned High Court Judge has misconceived and took it as Section 357 of

the Penal Code. These Sections are completely different to each other and

the ingredients also differs.

2. The Second ground of appeal is that the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th Accused

Appellants were convicted for both charges. In fact as per the indictment the

2nd, 3rd and 4th Accused Appellants were not indicted under Section 354. It

shocks the conscious of the Court that the Learned trial Judge has convicted

the Accused Appellants for an offence, on which they are not even charged.

We appreciate the Learned Deputy Solicitor General for maintaining the

highest tradition of the Attorney - General Department and conceive the fact

that conviction under Count No. 01 is patently wrong.

3. The Learned High Court Judge had found the Accused Appellants guilty

under Section 364 - (2) (e) and imposed a sentence of 7 years (under Section

362 - (2) (e)). This is again an error on the face of record.

4. As we stated in many Judgments the Accused Appellants has a right to

know the exact Section that he is charged and exact Section that he is

convicted and that is a golden norm. Anything deviating from the norm is

frown upon by the Appellate Court. In this case the Accused Appellant was

2

not given their due rights and entitlements enshrined under the constitution

and relevant laws. Further the Learned Trial Judge has considered wrong

Section in the body of the Judgment. She has discussed Section 264 (2) (e)

for grave sexual abuse and 364 (2) (g) for gang rape. The Attorney General

after considering all the material before him has preferred an indictment

under Section 364 (2) (e) of the Penal Code. Under those circumstances, we

could not find single reason for the Learned High Court Judge to discuss a

gang rape. This is a wrong legal concept, misconceived in the minds of the

Judge. This is further exposed in passmg the sentence because under

Section 364 (2) (e) statute carries a mandatory sentence of 10 years Rigorous

Imprisonment. And for Grave Sexual abuse the minimum sentence is 7

years. Here the Judge is giving less than the minimum mandatory sentence

shows that she had misconceived the law and the facts in this case.

Considering the error, we intend to send the case for retrial. But considering

facts discussed above, we find that the evidence will not bring a conviction

home for the prosecution. This factor also conceded by the Learned Deputy

Solicitor General. Therefore considering all material before us, we find that

there is no substantive admissible evidence led before the Court. Therefore,

we allow the appeal and acquit 1st to 4th Accused Appellants.

3

tri

~ It r,!II, !t!!I I! I! ,!

The Registrar is hereby directed to forward this Case Record to the Registrar,

High Court of Batticaloa forthwith.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

s. Devika de L. Tennekoon , J

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

YDj-

4