1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

C.A. No.823/98{F) Seyed Khan Azad Khan

234. Main street,

Kekirawa

Plaintiff Appellant

D.C.Anuradhapura 14335/RE Vs

P.V.A. Piyasena

320, Rani Cinema Hall,

Main Street, Kekirawa

Defendant Respmdemt

BEFORE: Deepali Wjesundera J.,

M. M. A. Gaffoor, J.,

COUNSEL: H. Withanachchi for the Plaintiff Appellant

Shyamal A. collure with A.P. Jayaweera and A. Adachi for the

Defendant Respondent

ARGUED ON: 03.11.2015

DECIDED ON: 28.04.2016

t

~

, ..

2

Gaffoor J.,

The Plaintiff-Appellant (hereinafter sometimes referred to as lithe

Plaintiff") instituted this action on 04.03.1992 against the Defendant

Respondent (hereinafter referred to as lithe Defendant") in the District Court of

Anuradhapura, stating inter alia, that he is entitled to the land and premises

morefully described in the schedule to the Plaint by Deed No. 2075 (marked

"p1") and prayed for a declaration that he is entitled to the said land, for

ejectment of the Defendant therefrom and damages at Rs. 5000/- per month

until delivery vacant possession and for costs.

The Defendant filed Answer denying the Plaintiff's cause of action and

stated that one C. Pathmanathan and C. Akaramurthi were running a cinema

theatre situated in the property in dispute till 1983 and thereafter due to ethnic

problems they left the place and the theatre was closed and with their consent

the Defendant started the cinema theatre business and paid Rs. 500/- as

monthly rent to the owner of the land Pushpambikai Nadarasiah and that he

entered into a Sale Agreement bearing No. 2045 with Pushpambikai Nadarasiah

and Kumaravelu Nadarasiah to buy this land but they failed to execute the

Sales Agreement and as such he could not purchase this property but he spent

about Rs. 12 lakhs to repair the cinema hall which he claims in re-convention in

3

the event of the case is decided in favour of the Plaintiff. This claim in

reconvention was rejected by the Plaintiff in his Replication.

When the case was taken up for trial on 20.06.1995 the following were

recorded as Admissions:

i. Averments in paragraph 4 of the Plaint;

ii. The original owner of the land in dispute was Kumaravelu

Nadarasiah;

iii. The persons mentioned in paragraph 3 of the Plaint are the heirs of

Kumaravelu Nadarasiah;

Paragraph 3 of the Plaint states that since the said Kumaravelu Nadrasiah

died leaving property below the administrable value and his widow

Pushpambikai Nadarasiah and three children namely (i) Kumaravelu Nadarasiah

Chandrasekaram (ii) Kamala Ranjanie Rajendra and (iii) Narendevi Peter

Gabriel, became entitled to the same.

Paragraph 4 of the Plaint, which is admitted by the parties, states that the

abovementioned persons and the Defendant Paranavitharana Arachchige

Piyasena entered into Sales Agreement to sell the land in dispute to the

I!I I

Iii

Defendant. The said Sale Agreement bearing No. 2045 dated 19.09.1990 and

attested by Silvius Augutus Yatawara, Notary Public is marked liPS".

Since the averment in the paragraph 4 of the Plaint is admitted by the

Defendant and also he had entered into a Sales Agreement with the widow and

children of the original owner of the land in dispute, Kumaravelu Nadarasiah,

the Defendant has admitted the title of the persons mentioned in paragraph 4

i.e the widow and the three children of Kumaravelu Nadarasiah and the

Defendant is therefore stopped from denying the title of them. Later by Deed

of Transfer No. 2075 dated 26.06.1991 and attested by S.A. Yatawara, Notary

Public, the Plaintiff has purchased the land in dispute from the persons

mentioned in paragraph 3 of the Plaint. This Deed is marked "p1". It must be

noted that the Plaintiff before purchasing the land had entered into a Sales

Agreement bearing No. 2063 with the persons mentioned in paragraph 3 of the

Plaint which is marked as "p2".

This is a rei-vindicatio action, where the Plaintiff has based his title from

the vendors. The Defendant had admitted that the Plaintiff's vendors are the

title holders to the property in dispute. It is a fundamental principle that in an

action for declaration of title to the property, where the legal title is in the

- ' ......

5

Plaintiff but the property is in the possession of the Defendant, the burden of

proof is on the Defendant.(see Siyaneris vs Udenis de Silva - 52 NLR 289).

Section 58 of the Evidence Ordinance states that what is admitted by the

parties need not be proved. This admission may be at the hearing or before the

hearing. In this case, the Defendant had admitted the title of the Plaintiff's

vendors not only at the hearing but also before the hearing by entering into the

Sales Agreement No.2045. It must be noted that the Defendant had been paying

Rs. 500/- as monthly rent to Pushpambikai Nadarasiah by which act the

Defendant had admitted the ownership of the land and premises of

Pushpambikai Nadarasiah. Also see Section 8(1} of the Evidence (Special

Provisions) Act No. 14 of 1995, which states, "In any proceedings it shall not be

necessary for any party to tender any evidence of any fact which is admitted by

the opposing party". Since the Defendant has unequivocally admitted the title

of the Plaintiff's predecessor from whom the Plaintiff has purchased the

property in dispute by Deed No. 2075 (P1). I hold that the Plaintiff has good

title to the property and it is the Defendant who must establish that he is in

lawful possession. In this regard the learned District Judge misdirected himself

on the law and held that the Plaintiff has not proved his title.

6

I now look into the possession of the Defendant. The Defendant has

stated in his Answer that there is a cinema hall by the name of "Rani Theatre" in

the property which was run by two persons, namely (i) D. Pathmanathan and

(ii) D. Akramoorthi during the period 1955 to 1983 and after ethnic riots in 1983,

these two persons had left the place.

According to the evidence of Pushpambikai Nadarasiah, the cinema hall

was erected by her husband Nadarasiah and the said Paramanathan and

Akramoorthi had been running only the cinema exhibiting business. They did

not have any right to the building. After these two persons left the place in

1983, the theatre was idling for sometime till 1990. These two persons never

came again to run the theatre business.

The Defendant has come into possession of the land, according to the Sale

Agreement No. 2045(P5), only on the strength of the Sales Agreement. It is clear

from the wording of the Agreement. Paragraph 2 in page 2 of (P5) states as

follows :-

lilt is further agreed between the party of the First Part and the Party of

the Second Part that the Party of the Second Part may enter upon and

7

take possession of the premises and buildings standing thereon and

described in the schedule hereto forthwith and occupy the same,"

From this statement it is undoubtedly clear that the Defendant has got

into possession of the building and premises only upon the Sale Agreement (PS)

which was executed on 19.09.1990.

The Sale Agreement PS becomes ineffective because of the default on the

part of the Defendant. Pushpambikai states in her evidence that lithe Defendant

agreed to buy this property for 3 Yz lakhs within 6 months from the date of the

Agreement (PS) i.e. 19.09.1990 and after 6 month she said he could not get a

bank loan to buy and therefore it was extended to 3 more months' and

thereafter the agreement became ineffective." It is thus clear that the Sale

Agreement (PS) with the Defendant became ineffective upon the failure of the

Defendant to find money to buy the property.

~ However, the fact remains that the Defendant came into possess the land I

in dispute only after PS was executed, that is, after 19.09.1990. The Defendant

has given evidence to the effect that he was working in the cinema hall as an

operator under the earlier owners of the cinema theatre business and

thereafter as Manager and later he met Pathmanathan and on whose request

[ ,}

.8

he started the cinema theatre business. When he took over there were only

four walls and he made all the improvements and paid all arrears of payments

to the Cinema Companies and brought the Hall into a itA" Grade theatre. All

these things he had done only for his business purposes and the Plaintiff or his

predecessors in title have nothing to do with these things done by the

Defendant for the improvement of his business. On a perusal of the Sale

Agreement (P5) entered into between Pushpambikai and her children and the

Defendant it is abundantly clear that they entered into the Sale Agreement only

to sell the land and premises and not about the cinema business. This

Agreement does not state a word about the cinema hall or cinema theatre

business.

It must be noted that in terms of (P5) the Defendant had undertaken that

if the Agreement becomes ineffective he will vacate and deliver peaceful

possession of the said premises and buildings to the Party of the First Part in the

said Agreement. Having paid Rs. 500/- as monthly rent to the owner of the land

Pushpambikai, the Defendant thereby accepted the ownership of the land and

premises and he is therefore stopped from denying her and her children's

ownership under Section 116 of the Evidence Ordinance.

-' ..

. 9

The Defendant raised Issues 17(a) and (b) that he is the licencee of

previous owner Pushpambikai and therefore the Plaintiff cannot maintain this

action against him, This contention is legally wrong and cannot be accepted.

The Defendant has taken up objection as to the description of the property to

the effect that it is not a divided land but a part of an undivided lot is untenable

because he himself wanted to buy the same land by entering into P5 without

any protest to its undivisibility. By his own conduct, he cannot raise this

objection and give evidence to that effect.

The land what is sold is clearly described in the body of the Deed No. 2075

(Pl) in addition to the schedule. Hence the body of the Deed can be accepted as

it prevails over the description in the schedule, (see Francis Assis vs Tampoe -

62 NLR 73).

Also, the Defendant's contention that he paid arrears of payment to the

Film Corporation, Rates and Taxes to the local authorities in respect of the

business carried on by him under the name "Rani Theatre" and electricity bills

etc cannot be accepted as this action is not in relation to the cinema theatre

business but on the question of declaration of title and ejectment. The Plaintiff

is not making a claim for the cinema business, therefore, the Defendant's claim

10

in reconvention cannot be maintained and should be rejected. If at all he has

spent a big amount for the improvement of the theatre business, he has to

claim that money from Pathmanathan on whose request the Defendant had re-

started the theatre business which was totally closed, and revived by him by

spending such amounts. The Plaintiff's claim is only for a declaration of title and

ejectment of the Defendant. As stated above, the Plaintiffs has proved his title

as against the Defendant and the Defendant has failed to prove legal possession

in his favour.

Issue No.8 was raised by the Defendant, was later mentioned in Issue No.

17 as follows:

(a) Is the Defendant the licencee of Pushpambikai Nadarasiah the

predecessor in title of the subject matter?

(b) If so, can the Plaintiff in this case get possession by ejecting the

Defendant therefrom?

Upon the above Issues the following consequential Issue was raised on

behalf of the Plaintiff as Issue No. 18.

18. Even if the Defendant was the licensee of the original owner, is the

Plaintiff precluded from instituting this action?

Ij

I

!

;f

~ ltIt

Ilt IIII

iI!

' ..

,11

The above Issues were answered by the learned District Judge as follows:

17 (a)

(b)

18.

Yes

Not possible

Yes

It must be borne in mind that the defendant states in para. (9) of the

Answer that "he agreed with the owner of the land Pushpambikai to pay Rs.

500/- per month and had been running the business." This paragraph does not

state on what basis he had agreed to pay Rs. 500/- per month. But definitely it is

not on the basis of tenancy or license as there is no written document to prove

his position. Even as a Licensee, the Defendant has admittedly paid this Rs.

500/- per month only for the business and not for the land.

It is in evidence that the Defendant and the previous owner of the land

Pushpambikai and children entered into a sale agreement (P5) on 19.09.1990

and on the strength of this Sale Agreement he had entered into occupation of

the land (page 2 of P5). The Defendant says in his further evidence on

20.05.1996, that he got the cinema business in writing from Pathmanathan in

1991. He also says that Pathmanathan wanted the Defendant to pay some

money for the running of the business. This clearly shows that the Defendant's

transaction about the business was with Pathmanathan and not with

!! I

i

\l$!I I tI

!

12

Pushpambikai. Other than this, there is no evidence that the said Pathmanathan

was a tenant or licencee of the previous owner Pushpambikai and others. On

what basis Pathmanathan was in possession of the cinema theatre is not

established. In the absence of any such evidence, the Defendant cannot say

that he is a licensee.

The Defendant got the consent of Pathmanathan to run the cinema

business, that is also in writing and paying some money. It appears therefore

that the Defendant got Pathmanathan's approval in writing because the Film

Corporation had given the right to exhibit their films to Pathmanathan and

therefore without Pathmanathan's approval, the Defendant cannot get the film

distribution right. This arrangement is only about the cinema business and not

about the occupation of the land.

In this case, the basis of the occupation of the premises by the Defendant

has not been established. The Defendant was neither a tenant nor a licensee. It

is also not established that Pathmanathan was a tenant or licensee. As the

Defendant says in his evidence he got a written approval in 1991 from

Pathmanathan to run the cinema business after he entered into the sale

agreement with Pushpambikai on 19.09.1990. After this date only, the

Defendant had got into possession of the land. But when he defaulted to pay

\,

I-t,

..

13

the purchase price and buy the premises in suit, he has no right to be on the

land. He undertook to handover peaceful possession if he defaults to buy.

Hence, he cannot be heard to say that he is a licensee, but on the other hand,

he is a trespasser against whom the Plaintiff has a right to institute this action.

It must be noted that two persons who were running the cinema theatre

business in the building situated in the property in dispute had no ownership to

the land on their names. They got into the business with the permission and

consent of the original owner Kumaravelu Nadarasiah and therefore the

Defendant who got the consent of Pathmanathan to re-start the cinema

theatre business cannot claim undisputed possession against the vendors of the

Plaintiff. One of the vendors Pushpambikai said in her evidence that she

allowed the Defendant to build a lavatory only. There is no evidence that the

theatre was built by the Defendant. Except for the improvements made by him,

the Defendant has failed to establish that it was he who built the theatre.

On a perusal of the schedule in Pl (The Deed of Transfer) it is apparently

clear that the vendors have sold the property to the Plaintiff, together with the

building (Rani Cinema) standing thereon and also everything else standing

thereon. According to the law of the country, when a land is sold, what is

.. '. .

.14

standing thereon goes with the soil. Therefore, the Plaintiff is entitled not only

to the soil but also to the things standing thereon.

The learned District Judge has misdirected himself in law in coming to the

conclusion that the Plaintiff has not proved his title. The evidence led in this

case, both oral and documentary clearly shows that the Plaintiff has established

his title beyond doubt and that the Defendant has failed to prove his possession

in terms of the law.

We therefore allow this appeal and set aside the Judgment of the lower

court. We also enter judgment for Plaintiff as prayed for in paragraphs I, 2, 4

and 5 in his Plaint with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Wijesundera J.,

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

f I ,

r I ! I

\ I

~ I I

\ I I !

t

f t , t !

~ f