IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA Case No. 182/2010

In the matter of an appeal in terms of

section 331 of the Criminal Procedure Act

No. 15 of 1979.

Vithanage Shelton ~er:era

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

HC (Avissawella) Case No 130/2004 Vs

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

1

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo. 12

COMPLAINANT - RESPONDENT

: Deepali Wijesundera J.

L. U. Jayasuriya J.

: Janaka Gamage for the

Accused - Appellant

Thusith Mudalige D.S.G. for the

Attorney General

: 17th November, 2017

: 07th December, 2017

L.U. Jayasuriya J.

The accused appellant (hereinafter referred to as the appellant)

was indicted in the High Court Avissawella under Section 296 of the

Penal Code for the murder of three persons namely Sellaiya Nagamma,

Krishnan Rajarathnam and Wellasinghage Done Laisahamy respectively

and after trial was convicted for the first and second counts and

sentenced to death. He was acquitted on the third count.

This appeal is from the said conviction and the sentence. The story

of the prosecution is that on the fateful day the three deceased along with

the sole eye witness were sleeping in a line room. In the night the eye

witness, prosecution witness no. 1 has heard a noise and woken up to

see the appellant (who was his uncle) attacking his grandmother. Then

he started shouting and has seen the appellant with a club. Further

prosecution witness no. 1 testified that he had seen his uncle (Krishnan

Rajarathnam) bleeding from one of his ears. He has seen the incident

from the light shedding from a bottle lamp.

After the case for the prosecution was closed the appellant making

a dock statement denied killing his mother. The Learned counsel argued

that the Learned High Court Judge misdirected himself in concluding that

the assault of Sellaiya Nagamma and Krishnan Rajarathnam had taken

place at the same time and the same manner.

Prosecution witness no. 1 in his evidence categorically states that

he saw Nagamma being attacked by the appellant and has seen

2

f III

Rajarathnam with a bleeding injury. Therefore the above findings of the

learned High Court Judge is correct.

The learned counsel for the appellant cited the judgment in

Withanage Premasiri Perera vs Attorney General CA 14/1998 decided

on 30.03.1999 and argued that findings of the expert witness are more

important than their opinion.

In the instant case although the Judicial Medital Officer who

conducted the post - mortem did not testify at the trial, another Medical

Officer has been called to give evidence and marked the post - mortem

report. The learned Deputy Solicitor General submitted that the appellant

has admitted expertise of the doctor and the doctor who gave evidence

has explained the injuries on the deceased persons.

For the forgoing reasons we decide to affirm the judgment dated

16.11.2016 and accordingly dismiss the appeal.

Appeal is dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Deepali Wijesundera J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

3

I ,

I

~ i t i {

f

I