1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal No:

CA/HCC/0376-379/2018 1. Thanippuli Arachchige Pradeep Jayalal

High Court of Colombo alias Chooty

Case No: HC/1283/2003 2. Muhandiramge Padmasiri Alwis

3. Jayasekera Arachchige Jubi Sampath

4. Thanippulige Arachchige Anura

Jayantha

ACCUSED-APPELLANTS

vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

2 | P a g e

BEFORE : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

P. Kumararatnam, J.

COUNSEL : Moditha T.B. Ekanayake for the 1st

Accused-Appellant.

Neranjan Jayasinghe with Harshana

Ananda and Dulshan Katugampola for the

2nd Accused-Appellant.

Saliya Pieris, PC with Pasindu

Thilakaratne for the 3rd Accused-

Appellant.

Anil Silva, PC with J.Kalupahana for the

4th Accused- Appellant.

Dileepa Pieris, SDSG for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 05/08/2022 and 09/08/2022

DECIDED ON : 30/09/2022

******************************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellants (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellants) were indicted in the High Court of Colombo under Section 296

read with Section 32 of the Penal Code for committing the murder of

Narayana Thanippuli Hewage Ranjith Fernando on or about 16th February

1996.

3 | P a g e

The trial commenced before the Judge of the High Court of Colombo as the

Appellants had opted for a non-jury trial. After the conclusion of the

prosecution case, the learned High Court Judge had called for the defence

and all the Appellants had made dock statements and denied their charge.

After considering the evidence presented by both parties, the learned High

Court Judge had convicted the Appellants as charged and sentenced them

to death on 28/11/2018.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence the Appellants

preferred this appeal to this court.

The learned Counsels for the Appellants informed this court that the

Appellants have given consent for this matter to be argued in their absence

due to the Covid 19 pandemic restrictions. Also, at the time of argument the

Appellants were connected via Zoom platform from prison.

Background of the Case.

PW2 is a cousin sister of the deceased. On the day of the incident at about

8.30 p.m. while she was listening to the radio in the kitchen, the deceased

had come running into her house and had hidden behind a cupboard. In a

while a group of persons including 1st and the 4th Appellants had entered her

house and had had a scuffle with the deceased there. As she started to

scream due to fear, the group had forcibly carried the deceased out of her

house. Thereafter, she had seen the deceased being carried into a land called

Palu Watta. After some time, the group had left the place. Thereafter, the

people of the area had brought the deceased out of the Palu Watta and

taken him to hospital. She had seen bleeding injuries on the stomach of the

deceased at that time.

PW4, a neighbor of PW2 had also witnessed the incident upon being vigilant

hearing the cries raised by PW2. She too had seen a group of people carrying

the deceased out of PW2s house. She too had raised cries at that time.

4 | P a g e

Among the group, she had identified the 1st Appellant. She too had witnessed

the group carrying the deceased to Palu Watta. After the deceased was

brought out from Palu Watta, she had seen serious injuries on the

deceaseds body.

Hearing the cries of PW4, the brother of the deceased PW3, had stepped out

from his house and had gone up to the fence and had witnessed all four

Appellants with various weapons shouting in abusive language. Thereafter,

he had seen the Appellants coming out from Palu Watta carrying the

weapons. According to him the 1st Appellant carried a sword, 4th Appellant

carried a Manna knife and others carried iron rods. After the departure of

the Appellants, the crowd carried the deceased from Palu Watta towards

the road and had taken him to the hospital. The deceased had suffered 13

external cut injuries on his body.

As animosity existed between the 1st and 4th Appellants and the deceased,

the 1st and 4th Appellants had come to PW3s house in search of the deceased

once prior to the killing. As they could not found the deceased, they had left

his house after assaulting the deceaseds father. PW3 was about 18 years old

when he witnessed the incident pertaining to this case.

Having satisfied that the prosecution had made out a prima facie case

against the Appellants, the learned Trial Judge had called for the defence

and all the Appellants had made dock statements and closed their case.

The Appellants had separately canvassed their Appeal grounds through their

Counsel.

The learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General at the very outset of his

submission and keeping with the highest traditions of the Attorney Generals

Department submitted that as no plausible evidence was led against the 2nd

and 3rd Appellants during the trial by the prosecution, he is not contesting

the Appeal grounds raised by the Counsels for the 2nd and 3rd Appellants.

5 | P a g e

Hence, I shall now proceed to consider the appeal grounds raised by the 1st

and 4th Appellants only.

The First Appellant had filed following grounds of appeal.

1. Failure of the prosecution to prove the death of the person named in

the indictment.

2. Identification of the 1st Appellant was not done beyond reasonable

grounds.

3. Failure of the learned Trial Judge to make a judicial evaluation of

the credibility of the prosecution witness by analyzing contradictions

marked by the defence.

4. No observation notes prepared by the police officers regarding the

incident during the investigation.

The fourth Appellant had filed following grounds of appeal.

1. Has the prosecution proved the case against 4th Appellant beyond

reasonable grounds.

2. If the contradictions and commissions in the evidence of PW2 and

PW3 were evaluated according to law would that have created a

reasonable doubt about the presence of the 4th Appellant at the

scene of crime.

3. If the evidence of Ranil Fernando cannot be considered against the

2nd and 3rd Appellants does that create a reasonable doubt as

regards the 4th Appellant as well.

4. Can the discovery of a witness in consequence of a statement made

by an accused be led under Section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance.

6 | P a g e

Considering the grounds of appeal raised by the 1st and 4th Appellants, it

becomes apparent that few of the grounds are interrelated. Hence, I will first

consider such common grounds of appeal of both the 1st and 4th Appellants.

Both the 1st and 4th Appellants under number two of their respective grounds

of appeal contended that the identification of 1st and 4th Appellants has not

been proved beyond reasonable doubt due to the contradictory nature of the

evidence given by PW2 and PW3.

Proper identification of the accused persons is a fundamental point that

needs to be determined at the beginning of a criminal trial. In this case it is

very important to discuss whether the prosecution has established the

identity of the 1st and 4th Appellants beyond reasonable doubt. If the

identification is compromised, the net result would be the acquittal of the

accused persons from the case. Hence evidence of identification should be

considered very seriously due to its delicate nature. In this case an

identification parade had not been held in respect of the 1st and 4th

Appellants.

The following judgments are very important as it elaborates the vitality of

identification evidence and discusses how the fate of a case depends upon it.

In Karunaratne Mudiyansege Madduma Bandara v. The Attorney General

CA/190-192/11 decided on 15/03/2013, the court acquitted the accused

on the ground that the identification of the accused persons have not been

proved beyond reasonable doubt because the prosecutrix failed to divulge

the names of the accused persons to the police who was known to her prior

to the incident.

Gorle S. Naidu v. State of A.P. [1997] Appeal (crl) 232-234. In this case the

facts related to the murder of two individuals. In the FIR, the prosecution

witness merely mentioned that the assailants were followers of one of the

appellants, but none were specifically named. However, later in court, they

7 | P a g e

stated the name of the assailants. The Court held that such omission was a

vital omission.

In R v. Turnbull [1977] QB 224 the court held that:

Where the case against an accused depends wholly or substantially on

the correctness of one or more identifications of the accused-which the

defence alleges to be mistaken-the judge should be cautious before

convicting the accused in reliance on the correctness of the

identification(s). The judge should take into consideration that:

Caution is required to avoid the risk of injustice;

A witness who is honest may be wrong even if they are convinced,

they are right;

A witness who is convincing may still be wrong;

More than one witness may be wrong;

A witness who recognizes the defendant, even when the witness

knows the defendant very well, may be wrong.

In this case two identification parades were held in respect of the 2nd and 3rd

Appellants. PW2 and PW4 had failed to identify the 2nd Appellant and PW2

had failed to identify the 3rd Appellant in their respective identification

parades. But PW3 had identified the 2nd and 3rd Appellants in the

identification parades.

The learned State Counsel in his final submission before the High Court

requested the court to specially convict 1st and 4th Appellants based on the

evidence given by PW2. The relevant portion is reproduced below:

tA wkqj uu f.!rjfhka ie, lr iskafka" ;a;slrejkaf.a ;a;sjdlh m%;slafIam lrk

f,i;a fuu kvqf fYaIfhkau idlaIs wxl 02 f.a ukdj ;yjqre fjk ,o idlaIs mok

lrf.k f kvqf fYaIfhkau wxl 1 yd 4 pQos;hka f kvqjg jrolre njg ;Ska lrk

f,i;ah'

(Page 657 of the brief.)

8 | P a g e

PW2 in her evidence before the High Court stated that on the date of incident

about seven persons had entered her house and dragged the deceased out of

her house. Although she had said that she identified 1st and 4th Appellants

at that time, she had given some evidence that was contradictory to the

evidence given by her in the examination-in-chief.

In the non-summary inquiry PW2 had said that two persons entered her

house and one had attacked the deceased with a sword. This contradiction

was marked as 1V-13.

Further she had told the police that Chuti had attacked the deceased inside

her house. This contradiction was marked as 1V-14.

In the contradiction marked as 1V-16, PW2 had told the police that she had

clutched Chuti to prevent the deceased being attacked by Chuti.

At the inquest PW2 had said that Chuti had cut the deceased with the sword

and whereby the sword had landed on the deceased. These contradictions

were marked as 1V-17 and 18.

In the non-summary inquiry PW2 had stated that the 1st Appellant had

attacked the deceased with a sword. This contradiction was marked as 1V-

19.

But in the High Court PW2 had said that she did not see a sword in the

hands of the 1st Appellant. Further her position in the trial was that the

persons who entered her house dragged the deceased out and took him to

the Palu Watta. Nothing was mentioned about the deceased being attacked

with a sword inside the house and PW2 trying to prevent the 1st Appellant

attacking the deceased.

Two omissions in respect of the 4th Appellant had been brought to the notice

of the court during the trial. In the first omission PW2 had not revealed the

identity of the 4th Appellant to the police. Further she had not mentioned

anything about the 4th Appellant during the inquest proceedings.

9 | P a g e

PW4 in her evidence stated that she was not aware of the name of the 1st

Appellant who was among the persons who dragged the deceased out of

PW1s house. But she only came to know about the identity of 1st Appellant

when she gave her statement to the police. The relevant portion is reproduced

below:

m% ( isoah jqKq oskfha rxcs;aj t<shg we`o,d .;af;a pQ lshk ku ;ud oek f.k ishdo@

W ( ta fj,df uu oek f.k isfha keye' fmd,sisfha we;a idlaIs igyka lrk g ;uhs

ud yrshg oek .;af;a'

m% ( ;ud thdj okakjd @

W ( tfyu okafka keye'

(Page 322-323 of the brief.)

PW4 further said that that she only came to know the name of the 1st and

4th Appellants through PW2. The relevant portion is reproduced below:

m% ( idlaIsldrsh ;ud f m%ldYh fokfldg pQ iy chka; k lr,d y`kak,d kakd @

W ( y`kak,d kakd fkdf tod isoah fjk fj,df l=iqudj;S lsjd pQ" chka;hs lsh,d'

uu pQ lshkakj;a okafka keye' uu miafia lsjdu ;uhs oek.;af;a'

(Page 334 of the brief.)

She also said that she has not identified the 4th Appellant at the time of the

incident. The relevant portion is reproduced below:

m% ( ta m%ldYfha Bg miafia ;ud pQ iy chka; lsh,d m%ldYfha kka lsh,d ;sfnkjd @

W ( uu lsjd fufyu fohla jqKd lsh,d' rxcsg tod .ykak wdju oelafla chka; rxcsj

urK fj,df oelafla keye chka; uu y`kd .;af;a keye iajdks' pQ ;uhs

fyd`ogu oelafla'

(Page 337 of the brief)

According to PW3, he had only seen the Appellants running away from the

Palu Watta with weapons in their hands. Further he had admitted that he

10 | P a g e

stated during the inquest that he suspects Chuti and two other persons

regarding the murder of the deceased. He further admitted during cross

examination that he had not mentioned the names of the 2nd, 3rd and 4th

Appellants to the police.

Considering the evidence given by PW2, PW3 and PW4 with regard to the

identity of the 1st Appellant and the 4th Appellant, there are contradictions

and omissions which certainly affect the outcome of the decision.

The proof of contradiction is vital to destroy the credibility of the case of the

prosecution. Proved contradictions and omissions which can affect the case

of the prosecution plays a vital role in a criminal case.

PW2 is the most important witness in this case. The contradictions marked

in her evidence are vital and certainly affects her credibility. They also raise

doubts about the probability of the incident as described by the PW2. What

she told to the police and at the inquest needs to be considered carefully as

PW2 had fresh memory regarding the incident when she gave her statement

and evidence during the inquest. Failing to mention important facts which

result in the failure to accurately identify the accused certainly affect the

prosecution case.

Further PW2s omission in mentioning the 4th Appellants name to the police

and at the inquest affects her credibility in this case. These omissions should

not be considered lightly, as it certainly affects the conviction of the 4th

Appellant.

The contradictions and omissions marked on PW2s evidence certainly have

a negative impact on the evidence given by PW4 as she had said that the

identity of the 1st Appellant was revealed by PW2 when she gave her

statement to the police.

11 | P a g e

In the case of AG v. Sandanam Pitchai Mary Theresa (2011) 2 Sri L.R. 292

the court held that:

Whilst internal contradictions or discrepancies would ordinarily

affect the trustworthiness of the witness statement, it is well

established that the Court must exercise its judgment on the

nature of the inconsistency or contradiction and should consider

whether they are material to the fact in issue.

In the case of K. Padmathilaka alias Sergeant Elpitiya v. The Director

General of Commission to Investigate Allegation of Bribery and

Corruption [2010] BLR 67 the court held that:

Credibility of prosecution witnesses should be subject to judicial

evaluation in totality and not isolated scrutiny by the judge. When

witness makes an inconsistent statement in their evidence either

at one stage or two stages, the testimony of such witness is

unreliableIt is a cardinal principle that unreliable evidence

cannot be rendered credible, simply because there is some

corroboration material.

The evidence of PW2 and PW4 as to the incident creates serious doubt with

regard to the identity of the 1st and 4th Appellants. The contradictory

positions taken by witnesses are vital and certainly goes to the root of the

case and is sufficient to create a reasonable doubt in the prosecutions case.

Hence, I am of the view that this ground of appeal has merit and certainly

vitiates the conviction.

As the ground of appeal considered above which was jointly raised by both

the Counsels for the 1st and 4th Appellants is sufficient to affect the credibility

of prosecution case and certainly disturbs the judgment of the learned High

Court Judge, it is not necessary to address the remaining grounds raised by

1st and 4th Appellants in this appeal.

12 | P a g e

Further, as the Learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General had not contested

the conviction and sentence imposed against 2nd and 3rd Appellants, I set

aside their conviction and sentence imposed on 28/11/2018.

Due to the aforesaid reasons, I set aside the conviction and the sentence

dated 28/11/2018 imposed on the 1st and 4th Appellants by the learned High

Court Judge of Colombo too. Therefore, all the Appellants are acquitted from

the charge.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send a copy of this judgement to

the High Court of Colombo along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL