Page 1 of 8

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Article

138 of the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, Section 14

of the Judicature Act No. 02 of 1978 read

with Section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

Court of Appeal No: Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

CA/HCC/102/2023 COMPLAINANT

Vs.

High Court of Hambamtota 1. Meegahalandadurage Sanath

Case No: HC/52/2017 Weeratunga

2. Meegahalandadurage Durage Sisira

Weeratunga

3. Gayrukagamage Anula

4. Lokugamage Piyasena

5. Nagodage Nadeera Jeewanthi

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

Page 2 of 8

Meegahalandadurage Sanath

Weeratunga

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

Before : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

: P. Kumararatnam, J.

Counsel : Malintha Jayasinghe for the Accused-Appellant

: Janaka Bandara, D.S.G for the Respondent

Argued on : 20-05-2024

Written Submissions : 26-03-2024 (By the Accused-Appellant)

: 20-09-2022 (By the Accused-Appellant)

Decided on : 23-07-2024

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

This is an appeal preferred by the 1st accused-appellant (hereinafter referred to

as the appellant) on the basis of being aggrieved of his conviction and the

sentence by the learned High Court Judge of Hambantota.

Page 3 of 8

However, when this matter was taken up for argument, the learned Counsel for

the appellant informed the Court that the appellant has instructed him to

withdraw the appeal against the conviction and only to make submissions on

the basis of the appropriateness of the sentence imposed by the learned High

Court Judge upon the appellant.

Accordingly, upon the withdrawal, the appeal against the conviction is

dismissed.

The views of the learned Counsel for the appellant, as well as of the learned

Deputy Solicitor General (DSG) were heard as to the sentence imposed upon the

appellant by the learned High Court Judge of Hambantota.

This is an action where the appellant was indicted along with four others before

the High Court of Hambantota for committing the following offences.

1. That he was a member of an unlawful assembly with the common object

of causing hurt to one Wijemuni Arachchige Nandasena at Suriyawewa

within the jurisdiction of the High Court of Hambantota on or about

10-11-2012, and thereby committed an offence punishable in terms of

section 140 of the Penal Code.

2. At the same and at the same transaction, he along with other members

of the unlawful assembly, caused injuries to the earlier mentioned

person, and thereby committed the offence of attempted murder,

punishable in terms of section 300 read with section 146 of the Penal

Code.

3. At the same time and at the same transaction, he along with others

caused injuries to the earlier mentioned person in furtherance of a

common intention, and thereby committed the offence of attempted

murder, punishable in terms of section 300 read with section 32 of the

Penal Code.

Page 4 of 8

The indictment was against 5 accused persons, the appellant being the 1st

accused. The evidence placed before the High Court also reveals that all five

accused named in the indictment are members of the same family.

After trial without a jury, by the judgment dated 09-02-2023, the learned High

Court Judge found the appellant guilty to the 2nd count of the indictment,

namely, attempted murder, while being a member of an unlawful assembly. The

rest of the accused were acquitted of the charges preferred against them.

After having considered the mitigatory as well as the aggravating circumstances,

the learned High Court Judge has imposed a period of 6 years rigorous

imprisonment on the appellant. He has also been ordered to pay a fine of Rs.

10,000/- with a default sentence of 12 months rigorous imprisonment. In

addition to the above, the learned High Court Judge has ordered the appellant

to pay Rs. 500,000/- as compensation to the victim, and in default, he has been

ordered to serve a default sentence of 2 years rigorous imprisonment.

The learned Counsel for the appellant submitted to the Court that all the accused

indicted had the intention of pleading guilty to the charge before the trial

proceeded, but it could not be materialized because the prosecution was not

prepared to accept a plea. It was his contention that the matter proceeded to trial

only because of the refusal by the prosecution to accept a plea. He was of the

view that, this fact should have been considered by the learned High Court Judge

in his sentencing order.

He also submitted that this was a matter where the actual victim, namely PW-

01, was not called to give evidence before the trial Court and the conviction has

been based on the other eyewitness accounts of the incident. He contended

further that the delay of the case coming to a conclusion should have also been

considered by the learned High Court Judge in imposing a sentence upon the

appellant.

The learned DSG on behalf of the respondent submitted that the learned High

Court Judge has considered the seriousness of the injuries suffered by the victim

Page 5 of 8

and the conduct of the accused of the indictment, which resulted in the victim

receiving such grievous injuries, as relevant in his sentencing order. He was of

the view that the learned High Court Judge had been lavishly reasonable when

he decided to acquit the other family members of the appellant in his judgment,

and when it comes to the sentence imposed upon the appellant. He was of the

view that there exists no basis to revisit the sentence imposed upon by the

learned High Court Judge.

It needs to be noted that this is a matter where a judgment has been pronounced

after a full trial, which should be considered different to a situation where the

accused person/persons have unconditionally pleaded guilty to the

charge/charges initiated before a High Court.

Although the journal entries of the High Court proceedings shows that there had

been an application to conclude the matter by way of a short cut, which implies

that the accused person may have been offered to reach a plea deal, it has not

come through. The only conclusion that can be reached is that the appellant and

the other accused may have expected the Court to impose them a suspended

sentence, which had not been agreed upon by the prosecution on the basis that

the injuries caused to the victim would not warrant such a sentence.

The victim, who was the PW-01 named in the indictment, had been suffering

from a mental condition where he was not able to understand the proceedings

before the Court, or to give evidence as to the incident. This had been the reason

why the prosecution has been unable to call him.

Accordingly, the prosecution has relied on the other eyewitnesses of the incident

to prove the case before the trial Court.

It is clear that the incident where the victim received these grievous injuries was

a result of a dispute relating to a land that persisted between the appellants

family and the injured persons family over a period of time.

Page 6 of 8

The learned High Court Judge in his sentencing order has considered the

application made on behalf of the appellant to impose him a suspended sentence

of imprisonment in terms of section 303 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act,

and has rightly concluded that although the appellant was a person with no

previous convictions, the facts and the circumstances does not warrant such a

cause of action.

The learned High Court Judge, after having considered several judgments of our

Superior Courts in relation to the appropriateness of a sentence that should be

imposed on a convicted person, and the matters that should be considered in

that regard, has decided to sentence the appellant. It is clear that the learned

High Court Judge has considered the fact that the appellant had no previous

convictions and the other relevant facts and circumstances in sentencing the

appellant.

In terms of section 300 of the Penal Code, the maximum sentence that could

have been imposed upon the appellant was 20 years rigorous imprisonment, or

a fine, or both.

The sentence of 6 years rigorous imprisonment imposed on the appellant by the

learned High Court Judge clearly indicates that the learned High Court Judge

has well considered all the relevant facts in imposing such a reduced sentence,

even after a full trial.

As considered by the learned High Court Judge in his sentencing order, in the

case of CA/LA 6/2013 decided on 25-01-2016, which was an appeal preferred

by the aggrieved party on the basis of inadequacy of the sentence after the

accused pleaded guilty to the charges preferred against them, Wijith K.

Malalgoda, P.C., J. (P/CA) (as he was then), after having considered several

decided cases on sentencing policy has observed as follows;

When considering the above decisions of our Courts it is observed that the

Courts have a duty to be mindful of aggravating and mitigatory factors of

Page 7 of 8

the case before them when imposing sentence, since those factors will play

a key role in deciding the sentence.

Basnayake, ACJ. (as he was then) in the case of Attorney General Vs. H. N.

De Silva (1955) 57 NLR 121, after having considered the things that should be

considered by a Judge when sentencing an accused person observed:

A Judge should, in determining the proper sentence, first consider the

gravity of the offence as it appears from the nature of the act itself and

should have regard to the punishment provided in the Penal Code or other

statutes under which the offender is charged. He should also regard the

effect of the punishment as a deterrent and consider to what extent it will

be effective. If the offender held a position of trust or belong to a service

which enjoys the confidence that must be taken into account in assessing

the punishment. The incidents of crime of the nature of which the offender

has been found to be guilty and the difficulty of detection are also matters

which should receive due consideration. The reformation of the criminal

though no doubt an important consideration, is subordinate to the others I

have mentioned. Where the public interest or the welfare of the State (which

are synonymous) outweighs the previous good character, antecedents and

age of the offender pubic interest must prevail.

Although our Courts do not have the advantage of following statutory sentencing

guidelines in sentencing an accused person, it is clear that the above views

expressed by Basnayake, ACJ. has been followed by our Courts with necessary

adaptations from time to time, since deciding what would be the appropriate

sentence of an accused person found guilty after trial or at situations where the

accused opted to plead guilty to the charges depends on the facts and the

circumstances of the relevant case.

It is clear from the sentencing order that the learned High Court Judge was well

possessed of the matters that should be considered in sentencing the appellant,

when the appellant was sentenced for rigorous imprisonment period of 6 years

Page 8 of 8

and to a fine, and also when the learned High Court Judge ordered him to pay

compensation to the victim.

I am of the view that the sentence imposed was not excessive under any

circumstances and, hence, finds no basis for the submissions of the learned

Counsel for the appellant in that regard.

Accordingly, the appeal against the sentence is dismissed for the want of merit.

However, having considered the fact that the 1st accused-appellant has been in

incarceration from the date of sentence, that is from 15-02-2023, it is ordered

that the 6-year rigorous imprisonment period imposed upon him shall deem to

have taken effect from 15-02-2023.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal