IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1. Expedit Cruis,

Paradise Beach Hotel (Pvt) Ltd.,

Luwis Place,

Kudapaluwa,

Negombo.

2. Paradise Beach Hotel (Pvt) Ltd.,

Luwis Place,

Kudapaluwa,

Negombo.

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

CASE NO: CA/PHC/113/2016

HC NEGOMBO CASE NO: HCRA/271/2013

MC NEGOMBO CASE NO: 74778

Vs.

Warnakulasuriya Raj Fernando,

No. 295,

Luwis Place,

Kudapaluwa,

Negombo.

Petitioner-Respondent-

Respondent

2

Before: A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: M.U.M. Ali Sabri, P.C., with Nuwan Bopage

and Samhon Munzir for the Respondent-

Petitioner-Appellant.

Buddhika Gamage for the Petitioner-

Respondent-Respondent.

Argued on: 23.10.2019

Decided on: 14.11.2019

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The petitioner (Raj Fernando) filed this application in the

Magistrates Court of Negombo against the respondent (Paradise

Beach Hotel) under section 66(1)(b) of the Primary Courts

Procedure Act seeking a declaration that he is entitled to use the

road depicted as Lot 4 in Plan marked P1, and an order to

remove all the obstacles placed by the respondent in the use of

that road by the petitioner. The respondent denied any such

right of way. After inquiry concluded by way of written

submissions, the learned Magistrate granted the reliefs sought

for by the petitioner, and that order was later affirmed by the

High Court. This appeal by the respondent is from that order of

the High Court.

3

When an application under section 66 is filed, a Magistrate can

largely make two orders. One is under section 68, which relates

to possession of any land. The other is under section 69, which

relates to any right to any land other than the right to

possession. The key word under section 68 is possession

whereas the key word under section 69 is entitlement.

A dispute relating to a right of way falls under section 69 where

the party who asserts such right shall establish that he is

entitled to that right.

However, this does not mean that (a) he shall prove his

entitlement as in a civil case filed before the District Court, and

(b) that he can come before the Magistrates Court long after the

alleged disturbance or denial of the exercise of his right.

Whether under section 68 or 69, the inquiry before the

Magistrates Court cannot be converted to a civil trial; and the

jurisdiction of the Magistrate cannot go beyond the objective to

be achieved by this special piece of legislation, which is to make

a provisional order in accordance with law, to prevent the breach

of the peace, until the substantive rights of the parties are

decided by a competent civil Court.

In response to what has been stated by the petitioner in his first

information to Court1, the position taken up by the respondent

in his affidavit dated 10.12.2012 is that, when he purchased the

land by Deeds in 2011, there was already a wall, and there was

1 Vide the affidavit of the petitioner dated 23.10.2012 at pages 52-55 of the brief.

4

no road which he obstructed.2 At paragraph 10 of that affidavit3

the respondent has stated that the petitioner broke a part of

that wall on 28.09.2011 and thereafter he complained it to the

police and the broken part of the wall was reconstructed.4

In response to paragraphs 10-12 of the respondents said

affidavit, the petitioner in paragraph 6 of his affidavit dated

28.01.20135 has stated that, although the respondent in

November made a complaint against him for falling over a

portion of this wall constructed across the road, that dispute

was settled on the promise that he (the petitioner) would be

given an alternative road along the northern and eastern

boundaries of the land, but such an alternative road has not

been given to him so far.

That means, admittedly, this is a stale dispute, and not a new

one as the petitioner has tried to portray in his first information

filed before the Magistrates Court. By the respondents

complaint dated 28.09.20116, which has not been denied by the

petitioner in the said affidavit, it is abundantly clear that the

wall across the alleged road had been there at least by

September 2011. The case has been filed by the petitioner

under section 66 as a private plaint on 23.10.2012, which is,

more than one year after the dispute.

2 Vide pages 83-85 of the brief. 3 Vide page 84 of the brief. 4 Vide police complaints at pages 102-105 of the brief. 5 Vide pages 61-62 of the brief. 6 Vide page 102-103 of the brief.

5

Such disputes, in my view, cannot be decided by the

Magistrates Court under section 66 of the Primary Courts

Procedure Act. The petitioner should have filed the case more

than one year after the dispute, not in the Magistrates Court,

but in the District Court.

This conclusion of mine shall not be taken to mean that a party

who seeks relief under section 69 in relation to any right other

than possession also shall come within two months of denial of

the right. But he shall, in my view, come within a reasonable

time. What is reasonable time shall be decided in the facts and

circumstances of each individual case. In the facts of this case,

the petitioner has not come within a reasonable time.

For the aforesaid reasons, I take the view that the learned

Magistrate did not have jurisdiction to hear and determine the

matter.

In the result, I set aside the Judgments of both the Magistrates

Court and the High Court and allow the appeal, but without

costs. The petitioners application in the Magistrates Court

shall stand dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal