Page 1 of 8

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

In the matter of an appeal against the Order made on 27.10.2016 by the Saouthern Provincial High Court holden in Tangalle in High Court/revision Case No. 04/2015.

Officer in Charge, Police Station, Katuwana.

Complainant

Vs. 1. Weerappulige Ashoka Weerasinghe,

Indumina, Watthehena, Karametiya, Kirama. [1st Party] 2. Wijamunige Charlis

Godalhena, Karametiya, Kirama. [2nd Party]

Parties AND

Wijamunige Charlis Godalhena, Karametiya, Kirama.

2nd Party-Petitioner Vs.

Weerappulige Ashoka Weerasinghe, Indumina, Watthehena, Karametiya, Kirama.

1st Party-Respondent AND NOW BETWEEN

Wijamunige Charlis Godalhena, Karametiya, Kirama. [Deceased]

2nd Party-Petitioner-Appellant

Court of Appeal Case No: CA (PHC) No: 138/2016 PHC of Southern Province holden in Tangalle Case No: HCRA/04/2015 MC Walasmulla Case No: 24027

Page 2 of 8

1. Ilandarige Yasawathie,

Godalhena, Karametiya, Kirama. 2. Gaman Kithsiri Kulasinghe,

No. 205/8/H/3, Galabada Isuru Mawatha, Rathna Mawatha, Dulanmahara, Piliyandala. 3. Sandhaya Kumudini Kulasinghe,

No. 85, Cemetery Road, Depanama, Pannipitiya. 4. Selton Rathnasiri Kulasinghe,

No.174/1/A/9, School Lane, Ekamuthu Mawatha, Halpita, Polgasowita. 5. Anura Pathmasiri Kulasinghe,

Godalhena, Karametiya, Kirama. 6. Dilshi Chathurani Kulasinghe,

Sithumini, Temple Road, Walasmulla. 7. Rasika Darshani Kulasinghe,

No. 95/2/D, Court Road, Homagama. 8. Sandhaya Rohini Kulasinghe,

No. 23/1, Uda Peekwella Road, Matara.

Substituted 2nd Party-Petitioner-Appellants

Vs.

Weerappulige Ashoka Weerasinghe, Indumina, Watthehena, Karametiya, Kirama.

1st Party-Respondent-Respondent

Page 3 of 8

Prasantha De Silva, J.

Judgment

The Officer-in-Charge of the Police Station-Katuwana, being the Complainant, had filed an

information in terms of Section 66 of the Primary Courts Procedure Act in case bearing No.

24027 in the Magistrates Court of Walasmulla against the 1st Party-Respondent-Respondent

and the 2nd Party-Petitioner-Appellant.

The learned Magistrate following the procedure stipulated under section 66 of the said Act

allowed Parties to file affidavits, counter affidavits and written submissions. After the conclusion

of the proceedings the learned Magistrate held in favour of the 1st Party-Respondent-Respondent

[hereinafter sometimes referred to as the 1st Respondent] and had held that the 1st Respondent

is entitled to possession of the disputed land by order dated 21.01.2013.

Being aggrieved by the said order, the 2nd Party-Petitioner-Appellant [herein after sometimes

referred to as the Appellant] had invoked the revisionary jurisdiction of the Provincial High

Court of Tangalle in case bearing No. 03/2013, seeking to revise or set aside the said order.

Apparently, the learned High Court Judge by his order dated 31.7.2014 sent the case back to

the Magistrates Court of Walasmulla to re-hear the matter and to make an appropriate order

by taking into consideration all the evidence and documentation produced by either party.

Before:

Prasantha De Silva, J.

K.K.A.V. Swarnadhipathi, J.

Counsel:

Heshali Pieris AAL instructed by Hashan Gunaratne AAL for the 2nd Petitioner-Appellant.

Rasika Dissanayake AAL with Himal Hewage AAL for the 1st Party- Respondent-Respondent. Written Submissions:

filed on

Written submissions filed on 23.03.2021 by the 2nd Party-Petitioner-Appellant.

Written submissions filed on 23.03.2021 and 21.02.2022 by the1st Party-Respondent-Respondent.

Delivered on: 08.08.2023

Page 4 of 8

Upon the matter being sent back to the Magistrates Court of Walasmulla, the learned Magistrate

who acted as the Primary Court Judge after taking into consideration all the evidence placed

before him, delivered the order dated 20.02.2015 in favour of the 1st Respondent, on the

premise that the 1st Respondent was in possession of the disputed land two months prior to the

date of filing of the information in terms of Section 68 (1) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act.

Being dissatisfied with the said order, the Appellant had preferred a revision application bearing

No. HCRA/04/2015 to the Provincial High Court of Southern Province holden in Tangalle,

seeking to revise or set aside the said order dated 20.02.2015.

Consequently, the learned High Court Judge of Tangalle after hearing both parties, affirmed the

order dated 20.02.2015, by the learned Magistrate of Walasmulla and dismissed the said

revision application by order dated 27.10.2016 with costs fixed at Rs. 10,500/-.

Against the said order dated 27.10.2016 of the Provincial High Court of Tangalle, the Appellant

has preferred this appeal to the Court of Appeal.

This is an appeal preferred against an order of the Provincial High Court exercising revisionary

jurisdiction. Since no appeal is provided in terms of section 74(2) of the Primary Court

Procedure Act against the order of the learned Magistrate, the court of Appeal is empowered to

evaluate the correctness of the exercising of revisionary jurisdiction by the Provincial high Court

and it is not the task before the Court of Appeal to consider an appeal against an order made

under and in terms of section 66 of the Primary Court Procedure Act.

It was emphasized by Ranjith Silva J. in the case of Nandawathi and another Vs. Mahindasena

[(2009) 2 SLR 218],

I am of the opinion that this particular right of appeal in the circumstances should not

be taken as an appeal in the true sense, but in fact as an application to examine the

correctness, legality or the propriety of the Order made by the High Court Judge in the

exercise of revisionary powers. The Court of Appeal should not under the guise of an

appeal attempt to re-hear or re-evaluate the evidence led in the main case.

In the instant case, the Respondent had raised a preliminary objection in the Provincial High

Court on the basis that Rule 3 of the Court of Appeal has not been complied with. Subsequently,

the Petitioner had produced such documents together with Petitioners counter objections.

However, the learned Provincial High Court Judge held that the Appellant had failed to comply

with Rule 3(1) of the Court of Appeal rules.

Accordingly, to Rule 3(1) states as follows,

3. (1)(a) Every application made to the Court of Appeal for the exercise of the powers

vested in the Court of Appeal by Articles 140 or 141 of the Constitution shall be by way

Page 5 of 8

of petition, together with an affidavit in support of the averments therein, and shall be

accompanied by the originals of documents material to such application (or duly

certified-copies thereof) in the form of exhibits. Where a petitioner is unable to tender

any such document, he shall state the reason for such inability and seek the leave of the

Court to furnish such document later. Where a petitioner fails to comply with the

provisions of this rule the Court may, ex mero motu or at the instance of any party,

dismiss such application.

(b) Every application by way of revision or restitutio in integrum under Article 138 of

the constitution shall be made in like manner together with copies of the relevant

proceedings (including pleadings and documents produced), in the Court of First

Instance, tribunal or other institution to which such application relates.

In the case of Urban Development Authority V Ceylon Entertainments Limited And Others

[2004] 1 SLR 95 at page 96 it was noted the Appellants application to the Court of Appeal was

dismissed on the following grounds,

(1) failure to set out exceptional circumstances which attracted revision; and

(2) failure to annex to his application originals or certified copies of documents relied

upon by the appellant.

In the above case Supreme Court further held that,

(1) The appellant failed to file in the Court of Appeal duly certified copies of material

documents as required by Rules 3(b) read with Rule 3(a) of the Supreme Court Rules.

(2) It is settled law that Rule 3 of the Supreme Court Rules must be adhered to.

(3) In view of the above finding it is not necessary to consider the question whether it is

necessary to plead specifically special circumstances which warrant the exercise of

revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal.

The learned Provincial High Court Judge had observed that the Appellant has failed to tender

documents 11 111 and 21 and 224, along with the Petition. Petitioner had also not

sought permission of court to tender those documents subsequently. Therefore, the learned High

Court Judge had dismissed the revision application of the Appellant on the ground that the

Appellant had failed to comply with Rule 3(1) of the Court of Appeal Rules.

It is the opinion of this court that the Learned Provincial High Court judge has acted within his

jurisdiction in entertaining the preliminary objection filed by the Respondent against the

revision application of the Appellant against the violation of Rule 3(1) of The Court Of Appeal

(Appellate Procedure) Rules 1990.

Page 6 of 8

The Judges have limited discretion in allowing certain procedural errors made by the litigants

and Attorneys-at-law alike to be rectified such limited discretion is allowed in order to allow for

manifest injustice to be prevented from a bona fide error being made by a Party, not to address

the negligence of an attorney-at-law who come before court.

The importance of following procedural law was evident from the pertinent observations made

by his lordship Dr. A.R.B. Amerasinghe J. in Fernando v. Sybil Fernando and others (1997) 3 Sri

L.R. 1

There is the substantive law and there is the procedural law. Procedural law is not

secondary: The maxim ubi ius ibi remedium reflects the complementary character of

civil procedure law. The two branches are also interdependent. It is by procedure that

the law is put into motion, and it is procedural law which puts life into substantive law,

gives it remedy and effectiveness and brings it into action.

[]

Judges do not blindly devote themselves to procedures or ruthlessly sacrifice litigants

to technicalities, although parties on the road to justice may choose to act recklessly. On

the contrary, as the indispensable vehicle for the appointment of justice, civil procedural

law has a protective character. In its protective character, civil procedural law represents

the orderly, regular and public functioning of the legal machinery and the operation of

the due process of law. In this sense the protective character of procedural law has the

effect of safeguarding every person in his life, liberty, reputation, livelihood and property

and ensuring that he does not suffer any deprivation except in accordance with the

accepted rules of procedure.

It has been established by our common law that the Supreme Court Rules are binding in a similar

manner to that of our statutory law. Thus, the above observations regarding the binding nature

of the procedural laws by Dr. A.R.B. Amerasinghe J. apply with equal merit to the Supreme Court

Rules.

In the instant case, the Appellant had admitted that the failure to file the documents was due to

a negligence of the registered attorney of the Appellant. The discretion of the court does not

generally exist to cater to the negligence of the Parties. There maybe instances in which the court

may allow parties to rectify bona fide errors made in filing a Petition and documents with prior

permission being obtained from the court. However, the present case does not fall within the

ambit of such discretion.

Furthermore, the learned Provincial High Court Judge had briefly considered the evidence

placed before the learned Magistrate and had come to the conclusion that the learned Magistrate

Page 7 of 8

had properly analysed and evaluated the evidence available and had come to a correct finding

of fact and law and held with the 1st Respondent.

The learned Provincial High Court Judge held that the Appellant had failed expressly aver the

existence of exceptional circumstances in the Petition for the revision application which shocked

the conscience of court to exercise revisionary jurisdiction of the Provincial High Court.

It is trite law that existence of exceptional circumstance is a pre-condition for the exercise of

revisionary powers of the court. In the instant case, Appellant had not specifically pleaded or

established exceptional circumstances warranting the exercise of revisionary powers of the

Provincial High Court, nor has the Appellant alleged the existence of exceptional circumstance

in the Petition of Appeal filed before this court, as Petition of Appeal has only addressed the first

ground for the dismissal of the case by the learned Provincial High Court Judge which was based

on the preliminary objection and not the second ground, which was the fact that Appellant has

failed to expressly set out the existence of exceptional circumstances for revisionary jurisdiction

to be invoked in the Petition for the revision application.

The learned Provincial High Court Judge has noted the following in his judgement,

09

2015.02.20

. 09

. .

.

.

As such, notwithstanding the preliminary objection, the Appellant has not expressly averred the

existence of exceptional circumstances which shock the conscience of the court in the Petition

filed before the Provincial High Court.

In Urban Development Authority Vs. Ceylon Entertainments Ltd. CA 1319/2001 [CAM

05.04.2002] Nanayakkara J. held with Udalagama J. agreeing,

That presence of exceptional circumstances by itself would not be sufficient if there is

no express pleading to the effect in the petition whenever an application is made

invoking, the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal.

Similarly, in Siripala Vs. Lanerolle [2012] 1 SLR 105, Sisira de Abrew J. held that,

Even though the Petitioner attempts to justify the recourse to revision in his written

submissions, it is well settled law that existence of such exceptional circumstances

Page 8 of 8

should be amply and clearly demonstrated in the petition itself.in the instant

application, the Petitioner has neither disclosed nor expressly pleaded exceptional

circumstances that warrant intervention by way of revision.

It the considered opinion of this court that for exceptional circumstances to exist, it would

require the Parties to establish a perversity in findings by the learned Magistrate that goes

beyond a mere conclusion reached on the evidence or to establish a lack of jurisdiction by the

Court. In this case, Appellant has alleged neither. Moreover, in this case, it seems to me that the

Appellant had failed to state that the exceptional circumstances exist in the Petition submitted

to the Provincial High Court for the revision application and had failed to set out the existence

of such exceptional circumstances in the Petition of Appeal filed before this Court.

In view of the above, as the Petitioner is in violation of Rule 3(1) of the Court of Appeal

(Appellate Procedure) Rules and as the Petitioner has failed to expressly set out the existence of

exceptional circumstances to invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of the Provincial High Court,

we see no reason to interfere with the judgement of the learned Provincial High Court of

Southern Province holden in Tangalle dated 27.10.2016. Thus, the judgement of the Learned

Provincial High Court Judge is upheld.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K.K.A.V.Swarnadhipathi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL