1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for

mandates in the nature of Writs of

Certiorar~ Prohibition and Mandamus in

terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka

C A (Writ) Application No. 81/ 2016

Mrs. Shahul Hameed Aynul Ariffa,

No. 45,

Dematagoda Passage,

Colombo 09.

PETITIONER

Vs.

2

1. A J M Muzammil,

Mayor of Colombo,

Colombo Municipal Council,

Colombo 07.

2. V K A Anura,

Municipal Commissioner,

Colombo Municipal Council,

Colombo 07.

3. L R L Wickremaratne,

Deputy Municipal Commissioner,

Colombo Municipal Council,

Colombo 07.

4. Mrs. 5 D N P N De Pieris,

Director,

City Planning Division,

Municipal Engineer's Department,

3

Colombo Municipal Council,

Colombo 07.

5. Director,

Urban Development Authority,

7th Floor,

Sethsiripaya,

Battaramulla.

6. Mrs. K A Premalatha Perera,

No. 52,

Dematagoda Passage,

Colombo 09.

7. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

Before:

4

P. Padman Surasena J (PIC A)

A.L Shiran Gooneratne J

Counsel: Rushdie Habeeb with S K Rizla for the Petitioner.

Senany Dayaratne with E Mendis and N Wickremasinghe for the

2nd I 3rd and 4th Respondents.

Saman Galappaththi with M Gunasena for the 6th Respondent.

Zuhri Zain SSC for the 5th and ]th Respondents.

Argued on : 2018 - 02 - 09

2018 - 07 - 12 Decided on

JUDGMENT

P Pad man Surasena J (P I C A)

The Petitioner in this application prays inter alia for a mandate in the

nature of a Writ of Mandamus to compel the 1st to 6th Respondents to

5

Implement the decision in the document produced marked P 5 and to

remove the unlawful construction referred to therein.

The Petitioner has initially complained to the Colombo Municipal Council

that the 6th Respondent has unlawfully constructed a bathroom and a toilet

close to the Petitioner's kitchen. She had expected the 1st to 4th

respondents to take action to demolish the said construction. The failure on

the part of the said respondents to take action to demolish the said

unauthorized structure constructed by the 6th Respondent has prompted

the Petitioner to file the instant application praying from this Court, a writ

of Mandamus to compel the said respondents to take such steps.

The 2nd, 3rd and 4th Respondents have brought to the notice of this Court

that it is not only the 6th Respondent's structure that is unauthorized but

that the Petitioner's dwelling place also has been built without any permit

from any relevant authority. It is on that footing that the learned counsel

for the 2nd, 3rd and 4th Respondents has argued that the Petitioner should

be precluded from maintaining this application on the 'clean hands

doctrine'.

6

Moreover, the learned counsel for the 2nd, 3rd and 4th Respondents has

submitted that any issuance of a writ of Mandamus for such purpose from

this Court might even lead to a civil unrest as majority of constructions

along Dematagoda passage, Colombo 09, fall under the same category. It

is the position of the Colombo Municipal Council that it had not taken any

action with regard to the complaint of the Petitioner due to the above

reason. The said respondents have stated that the Colombo Municipal

Council would abide by any decision this Court would make.

Although the Petitioner has complained that her right to good health and

sanitary facilities have been violatedl this Court is of the view that no such

right could be accrued to the Petitioner as long as she dwells in an

unlawfully constructed dwelling place. This is because such rights to good

health and sanitary facilities could not have been violated if the occupant of

a house has ensured the strict adherence of the regulations and guidelines

designed by the authorities with a view of protecting such rights for the

occupants. In other words, when one constructs in an unauthorized way

and occupies such a house without adhering to such guidelines it would be

inevitable that the aforementioned rights would not be preserved. Thus, a

1 Paragraph 12 of the petition.

7

person who occupies such haphazardly constructed house would not be

able to enjoy any such right to good health and sanitary facilities.

Deprivation of such rights are inherent in most of such unauthorized

constructions. Responsibility for such breaches lie with the unauthorized

builder rather than the other persons around.

This Court is of the view that it should not permit the Petitioner to use the

discretionary writ jurisdiction of this Court to assert rights, which the law

does not guarantee to her.

In the case of Vasana Vs. Incorporated Council of Legal Education and

others? His Lordship Justice Gamini Amaratunga stated as follows; " ... A writ

of mandamus is available against a public or a statutory body performing

statutory duties of a public character. In order to succeed in an application

for a writ of mandamus the petitioner has to show that he or she has legal

right and the respondent corporate, statutory or public body has a legal duty

to recognize and give effect to the petitioner's legal right. ,,"

Perusal of the material adduced before Court clearly shows that the

Petitioner has failed to satisfy this Court that she has any legal right to her

2 2004 (1) SLR 163

8

claim for a right to good health and sanitary facilities as she herself has

constructed her house in violation of the existing legal requirements.

The jurisdiction to issue writs, which is vested in this Court by virtue of

Article 140 of the constitution, is a jurisdiction, which this Court could

decide in its discretion to exercise in a fit case. For the foregoing reasons,

this Court is of the view that the instant case is not a fit case in which this

Court should exercise its discretionary writ jurisdiction.

In these circumstances, this Court decides to refuse this application.

This Application should therefore stand dismissed without costs.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

A.L Shira" Goo"erat"e 1

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL