IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

C.A. Case No. 02/2016

NWP/HCCA/KUR/34/2010 (F)

D.C. Kuliyapitiya Case No. 12500/L

In the matter of an Application for Restitutio in

Integrum under Article 138(1) of the

Constitution of Sri Lanka.

lIuktenna Arachchilage Piyasena

of Madigepola, Yakwila Post.

Plaintiff

-Vs-

Ratnayake Mudiyanselage Kumarihamy

of Madigepola, Yakwila Post.

Defendant

Seelwathie

Rajapakse Mudiyanselage Karunaratne

of Madigepola, Yakwila Post.

Substituted Defendant

AND

Rajapakse Mudiyanselage Karunaratne

of Madigepola, Yakwila Post.

Substituted Defendant - Appellant

-Vs-

1

I

~ I!

iI

fi

tII ,f!t

I I! f

~, f

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Decided on

A.H.M.D. NAWAZ, J.

lIuktenna Arachchilage Piyasena

of Madigepola, Yakwila Post.

Plaintiff - Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

Rajapakse Mudiyanselage Karunaratne

of Madigepola, Yakwila Post.

Substituted Defendant - Appellant - Petitioner

-Vs-

lIuktenna Arachchilage Piyasena

of Madigepola, Yakwila Post.

Plaintiff - Respondent - Respondent

A.H.M.D. NAWAZ, J. and

H.C.J. MADAWALA, J.

Pubudu de Silva with D.D.P. Dassanayake for the Petitioner.

23.05.2017

The Substituted Defendant-Appellant-Petitioner (sometimes hereinafter called lithe

Petitioner") has preferred this application to this court for restitutio in integrum

invoking Article 138(1) of the Constitution. This is a matter which reached the

Supreme Court on an appeal from the Provincial High Court holden in Kurunegala

and the Supreme Court refused leave by its order dated 02.09.2015. Two months

2

after the refusal of leave by the Supreme Court, the application for restitutio in integrum to this Court has been made on 23.12.2015.

When this matter came up for support, this Court posed the question to the Counsel

for the Petitioner as to whether it was possible for this Court to assume jurisdiction

in a matter where the Supreme Court had declined to exercise its appellate

jurisdiction by refusing leave. The Counsel for the Petitioner sought to file written

submissions in order to respond to this threshold question. When the court pointed

out that the order of the Supreme Court wherein it refused leave was not appended

to the petition before this Court, the Counsel for the Petitioner again sought leave of

this Court to tender the same and upon the grant of leave the Petitioner has filed the

necessary documents. This Court is now fully seized of the factual background to this

petition.

The chronology of litigation in the case

The Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter sometimes referred to as lithe

Plaintiff") instituted a rei vindicatio action against the original defendant (since

deceased and now represented by the petitioner) seeking a declaration of title to the

land described in the schedule to the plaint, ejectment and damages. The original

defendant pleaded prescription but the learned District Judge of Kuliyapitiya rejected

the plea of prescription after trial -please see pages 20-21 of the judgment dated

18.02.2010 marked as P6 to this petition. The learned District Judge of Kuliyapitiya

granted the reliefs sought by the Plaintiff. The original defendant appealed to the

Provincial High Court of the North-Western Province in Kurunegala and the learned

Judges of the Provincial High Court by their judgment dated 29.11.2013 dismissed

the appeal of the original defendant. It has to be noted that in the application filed

for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court against the judgment of the Provincial High

Court dated 29.11.2013, one of the questions of law on which leave was sought was

as follows-

"Did the High Court, err by failing to consider in any way, and by failing to come to any finding on the second main submission made by or on behalf of the substituted-defendant-appellant, namely on the question of prescriptive title relied on and put in issue by the defendant?"

In other words, the gravamen of the petitioner's complaint before the Supreme

Court in seeking leave was that the learned High Court Judges of the Provincial High

3

t

f

~ /

Court in their judgment dated 29.11.2013 had not considered the submissions made

on prescription -please see paragraph 17 of the application for leave to appeal

30.12.2014.

It is this leave to appeal which came up for support before the Supreme Court on

02.09.2015. The proceedings before the Supreme Court which are briefed to this

Court read as follows:

"Be/ore: K. Sripavan 0.

S.E. Wanasundera, PC.l. and

U. Abeyrathne, l.

Counsel: Dr. S.F.A. Cooray for the Substituted-Defendant-Appellant-Petitioner

M.D.l. Bandara for the Plaintif!-Respondent-Respondent

Argued &

Decided on: 02.09.2015

K. Sripavan, CJ.

We have heard learned Counsel for the Substituted-Defendant-Appellant-

Petitioner. We have also heard learned Counsel for Plain tiff-Responden t-

Respondent. We see no basis to grant leave to appeal. Leave to appeal is

refused.

S. E. Wanasundera, Pc. l.

I agree.

U. Abeyrathne l.

I agree."

Thus it is quite clear that the Supreme Court refused to grant leave on the question of prescription after having heard the submissions on behalf of both Counsel for the

Substituted-Defendant-Appellant-Petitioner and Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent.

4

!tkI

iI

~

The Petitioner was represented by so eminent a Counsel as Dr. S.F.A. Coorey and

having framed a question of law on prescription, there is no gainsaying that the

learned Counsel addressed Court on prescription. It cannot be said that the Supreme

Court was not addressed on prescription. It is not even suggested that the Supreme

Court did not hear submissions on prescription.

Whilst the Supreme Court has refused leave on the submissions made before it, an

attempt is now made to this Court invoking Article 138 of the Constitution to re-

agitate the identical issue of prescription before this Court. If the Provincial High

Court erred by turning a Nelsonian eye to prescription, the remedy of leave to appeal

to the Supreme Court was available by virtue of the provisions of the High Court of

the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990 as amended by Act No. 54 of

2006 and this right was certainly availed of by the Petitioner but with no avail.

Is restitutio in integrum available?

No doubt the power to entertain applications by way of restitutio in integrum has

been conferred with the Court of Appeal by the Constitution of the country.

Article 138(1) of the Constitution states thus,

liThe Court of Appeal shall have and exercise subject to the provisions of the Constitution or of any law, an appellate jurisdiction for the correction of all errors in fact or in law which shall be committed by any Court of First Instance, tribunal or other institution and sole and exclusive cognizance, by way of appeal, revision and restitutio in integrum, of all causes, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things of which such Court of First Instance, tribunal, or other institution may have taken cognizance."

A careful reading of the scope and ambit of restitutio in integrum brings out the fact

that the exercise of this extraordinary jurisdiction extends to all causes, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things of which a Court of First Instance, tribunal, or other institution may have taken cognizance in that there must be a court of first instance,

tribunal or other institution which must have heard in the first instance a cause,

suit, prosecution, matters and things, so to speak. It is the orders, judgments or whatever description you may call it, that are made in the first instance, that

become susceptible to cognizance of this Court in its exercise of restitutio in integrum. The words "such Court of First Instance, tribunal, or other institution" in

5

f!1

ft f,rI ,

II

f

!

\

Article 138(1) of the Constitution should be read ejusdem generis and it is as plain as

the nose on your face that these words would not include the Supreme Court. Let me

reiterate that there is no allegation in the petition before me nor is it supported by

any affidavit that the Supreme Court did not hear submissions on prescription before

it proceeded to dismiss the application for leave to appeal by its order dated

02.09.2015. So the question of law on prescription becomes a matter or thing that

the Supreme Court took cognizance of and this Court cannot assume a jurisdiction

that it does not possess in order to exercise restitutio in integrum over a matter

which the Supreme Court took cognizance of. In terms of Article 138(1) of the

Constitution, restitutio in integrum is reserved for the review of orders made by

institutions beneath the Court of Appeal.

If a question of law such as prescription was brought home to the apex Court of this

Country which disallowed it after submissions, I cannot hold the view that the self-

same question can be traversed by this Court in its exercise of restitutio in integrum.

Article 138(1) of the Constitution does not bestow a jurisdiction to order restitution

in a matter where the Supreme Court has declined jurisdiction, having heard

submissions on the identical issue.

In Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation Ltd. vs. Shanmugam and Another\ Ranaraja, J.

(with S.N. Silva, J. (PICA) agreeing) declared that Article 138(1) of the Constitution

has vested the Court of Appeal with the sole and exclusive jurisdiction to grant relief

by way of restitutio in integrum. The power of the Court to grant such relief is a

matter of grace and discretion. Restitution reinstates a party to his original legal

condition which he has been deprived of by operation of law. 2

Be that as it may, it is undeniable that restitutio in integrum is an extraordinary

remedy and will be granted only under exceptional circumstances and the remit of

that jurisdiction is the review of causes, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things of which Courts of First Instance, tribunal, or other institution may have taken cognizance.

When the Supreme Court has acted in its jurisdiction touching upon an issue and if a

petitioner seeks to revive and revisit that issue in this Court, this Court cannot usurp

a jurisdiction which it does not have, in the guise of restitutio in integrum.

11995 (1) Sri L.R 55

2 See the observations at page 59 of Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation Ltd. v. Shanmugam and Another (supra)

6

I, II I ! I

\1

fIt !

Ii

f!I!

~ ,

~ t [It

IfI

!t

\

~

So when the Supreme Court has considered a question of law and refused leave on

that question, restitutio in integrum cannot be invoked to re-agitate the same

question under Article 138(1) of the Constitution. The very terms of Article 138(1)

place an embargo and prohibit the invocation of this Court's jurisdiction. Such

invocation is outside the pale of Article 138(1) of the Constitution and no

proceedings could be had on this application. One cannot but overemphasize the fact

that there has to be a finis to litigation and the boundaries of restitutio in integrum

are not so extensive as to accommodate causes which have run their course and

exhausted themselves in the Supreme Court.

Accordingly notice is refused and the application for restitutio in integrum is

disallowed.

H.C.J. Madawala, J. I agree

7

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL I. f1

tJ