IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Abdul Kafoor Mohamed Buhari. (Deceased), No. 161/12, Jampattah Street, Kotahena, Colombo 03.

Plaintiff C.A.No.811/2000(F) Vs. D.C. Colombo Case No. 17753/L Anthony Muththu Anthony Amma, No. 161/12, Jampattah Street, Kotahena, Colombo 03.

Defendant. AND

Abdul Kafoor Mohamed Buhari. (Deceased) No. 161/12, Jampattah Street, Kotahena, Colombo 03.

Plaintiff-Appellant Vs.

Anthony Muththu Anthony Amma, No. 161/12, Jampattah Street, Kotahena, Colombo 03.

Defendant- Respondent.

NOW AND BETWEEN

Binthi Ruwaiza, No. 161/12, Jampattah Street, Kotahena, Colombo 03.

Substituted Plaintiff- Appellant.

Before

Counsel

Decided On :

2

Vs. Anthony Muththu Anthony Amma, No. 161/12, Jampattah Street, Kotahena, Colombo 03.

Defendant- Respondent.

E.A.G.R. Amarasekara, J

Ravindra Anawaratne for the Plaintiff - Appellant.

P. Peramunagama with Ranga Peris for the Defendant-Respondent.

14.12.2018.

E.A.G.R. Amarasekara, J.

This is an appeal made against the Judgment dated 25.09.2000, delivered by the

learned District Judge of Colombo in Case No. 17753/L.

It is my considered view that the learned District Judge erred in dismissing the Plaint

for the following reasons;

1. The Defendant Respondent (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the

Defendant) came as a tenant of the Plaintiff in June 1984 to the property

described in the Plaint. (vide the agreement marked P2 which was

admitted by both the parties). Therefore, at that time, she was conceding

that the title to the premises in issue was with the Plaintiff.

2. Though the learned District Judge has come to the conclusion that this

action was not based on the lease agreement marked as P2, it is clear

from the averments of the Plaint and issue no.2 that the position of the

Plaintiff is that the Defendant is an overholding lessee.

3

3. The learned DistrictJudge has answered the issue no.12, which was raised

by the Defendant to get the protection of the Rent Act, No.7 of 1972, as

'Not Proved'. As the learned District Judge has stated in his judgment, no

evidence was led to prove that the relevant premises falls within the

ambit of the said Act. On the other hand, while denying that the Plaintiff

is the landlord and her occupation of the premises is based on the rights

of her children (jus tertii) she cannot be allowed to claim the protection

given by the Rent Act. She shall not be allowed to blow hot and cold

simultaneously.

4. The Plaintiff was given a deed of disposition by the Commissioner of

National Housing on 26.06.1995- (vide Pi). It was marked without any

objection whatsoever. No evidence was led by the defendant to show

that the predecessors in purported title of the Defendant's children took

any steps when this premises was vested with the Commissioner of

National Housing.

5. It appears that there is a pending inquiry before the Commissioner with

regard to the validity of the aforesaid deed of disposition (Pi), for which

inquiry the Plaintiff was not given proper notices. However, it is clear

from the evidence led that there was no order invalidating the said deed

up to the time of the trial- (vide the evidence led through the officers of

the National Housing Authority). The learned District Judge had to

adjudicate the rights of the parties as at the date of filing the Plaint.

Therefore, even at the date of filing the Plaint as well as during the trial,

the Plaintiff had paper title and the learned District Judge has found that

4

the Defendant had failed in proving the title of her children to the

premises as mentioned below.

6. The learned District Judge has correctly found that there was no sufficient

evidence to prove that the Defendants children got title through the deed ,.

marked V4, since the Defendant failed in proving how S.H.M. Hussain,

whose purported title seems to have been devolved upon the vendor of

V4, got title to the premises. On the other hand, vendor in V4 had stated

in V4 that her title derived through a last will of said S.H.M. Hussain but

no evidence was led to prove that the said last will was proved in a

Testamentary action filed in that regard.

7. Merely because there is a pending inquirY,one cannot decide Pl, which

was not objected as aforesaid, did not convey title to the plaintiff specially

when the Defendant failed to prove title through V4. Till the deed Pl is

invalidated by due process of law)it has to be considered as a valid deed.

8. The Defendant's children who)as per the Defendant's stance; have the title

to the property were not made parties or have not come forward to state

that they have the title to the land and the Defendant is in occupation

with their leave and permission.

9. For the reasons given above there was evidence on balance of probability

to prove that the Plaintiff had title to the subject matter on the date he

filed the Plaint and said title was not invalidated during the trial.

Since the learned District Judge's conclusion is not supported by the evidential

materials revealed in the case as elaborated above, this Court decides to set aside

the said Judgment dated 25.09.2000 of the learned District Judge of Colombo.

5

Though the Plaintiff has claimed Rs.50000/- as compensation and Rs. 1000/- per

month as damages till the possession is given back to him, he has not substantiated

how he quantified the damages. As per the document marked P2, he has given the

premises on rent for Rs.100/- per month. He has taken almost 9 years from the

termination of lease agreement as per the document marked P2 to file an action.

Therefore, he is entitled only to Rs.100/- per month as damages from a date two

years prior to the date of filing the Plaint till he gets the quiet possession of the

premises. Subject to that the Plaintiff is entitled to prayer la', Ib' and Id' of the

Plaint. He is entitled to damages under prayer Ie' only as mentioned above.

The appeal is allowed with costs.

E.A.G.R. Amarasekara

Jude of the Court of Appeal.