CA/PHC/0237/2019

Page 1 of 24

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal against the Judgment dated 03.12.2019 under casebearing No. HC RA 01/2017 in the High Court of Embilipitiya under and in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution of theDemocratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. R. B. Rathnayake Resident Project Manager, Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka, Walawa Special Area, Embilipitiya.

Applicant Vs.

Nawurunnage Sarath Kumara, No. 959/06, Wehisagama, Moraketiya, Embilipitiya.

Respondent AND NOW

Nawurunnage Sarath Kumara, No. 959/06, Wehisagama, Moraketiya, Embilipitiya.

Respondent-Petitioner Vs. R. B. Rathnayake Resident Project Manager, Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka, Walawa Special Area,

Court of Appeal Case No: CA (PHC) 237/2019 HC Revision Application No: 01/2017 MC Embilipitiya Case No: 41884/17

CA/PHC/0237/2019

Page 2 of 24

Embilipitiya.

Applicant-Respondent AND NOW

Nawurunnage Sarath Kumara, No. 959/06, Wehisagama, Moraketiya, Embilipitiya.

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant Vs. R. B. Rathnayake Resident Project Manager, Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka, Walawa Special Area, Embilipitiya.

Applicant-Respondent-Respondent Before: D. THOTAWATTA, J. K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J. Counsel: Niranjan Arulpragasam with Lasika Udayangani instructed by Dinesh De Silva for the Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant.

Pulina Jayasuriya, S.C. for the Applicant-Respondent-Respondent. Argued on : 29.05.2025 Written Submissions of the Respondent-Petitioner- Appellant tendered on : 01.08.2024 and 18.07.2025 Written Submissions of the Applicant-Respondent- : Not tendered Respondent tendered on

CA/PHC/0237/2019

Page 3 of 24

Decided on : 19.06.2025 K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

This is an appeal filed before this Court by the Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

(hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Appellant’) against the order of the

learned High Court Judge of the Sabaragamuwa Province holden at

Embilipitiya dated 03.12.2019 made in revision application bearing No. HC RA

01/2017.

The facts relevant to the instant appeal as can be gathered from the petition of

appeal, may be briefly, set out as follows;

The Applicant-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter called and referred to as

‘the Respondent’) had made an application to the Magistrate Court of

Embilipitiya in case bearing No. 41884/17 under and in terms of the

provisions of Section 5 of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act No. 07 of

1979 (as amended) (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Act’) for the

eviction of the Appellant from a State Land as morefully described in the

schedule to the application (hereinafter called and referred to as the ‘State

Land’). The Appellant who appeared before the Magistrate Court of Embilipitiya

in pursuant to the summons issued on him by Court to appear and show

cause against the application made to Court by the Respondent under Section

5 of the Act for his eviction from the State Land, had raised a preliminary

objection as to the maintainability of the application on the premise that the

land from which his eviction had been sought by the Respondent, is neither

vested in, nor owned by, nor under the control of the Sri Lanka Mahaweli

Authority and therefore, under and in terms of section 18 of the Act to be read

with section 22 of the Mahaweli Authority Act, the Respondent has no legal

authority to take steps thereunder to evict him therefrom for; he is not the

competent authority within the meaning of the Act and hence the application

for ejectment ought to be dismissed in-limine. Without prejudice to the

CA/PHC/0237/2019

Page 4 of 24

preliminary objection so raised by him, the Appellant had taken up a further

position that in view of the pedigree pleaded in his showing cause, he had

become the lawful owner of the land from which his eviction had been sought

by the Respondent, and therefore, the land in question is not a State Land but,

a private land and hence, the Appellant is not liable to be ejected from the land

belonging to him and therefore, it should be dismissed in-limine.

However, the learned Additional Magistrate of Embilipitiya in his order dated

15.03.2017 had having rejected the preliminary objection so raised by the

Appellant as to the maintainability of the application together with the entirety

of the Appellant’s showing cause, proceeded to grant the application directing

eviction of the Appellant from the State Land by inter-alia, holding that the

Appellant had shown no valid cause to the application for ejectment made to it

by the Respondent under section 5 of the Act.

Being aggrieved by the said order of the learned Additional Magistrate of

Embilipitiya dated 15.03.2017, the Appellant had invoked the extra-ordinary

revisionary jurisdiction of the High Court of the Sabaragamuwa Province

holden at Embilipitiya seeking to revise and set aside it. The learned High

Court Judge of the Sabaragamuwa Province holden at Embilipitiya had by the

order dated 03.12.2019, dismissed the application in revision by holding that

the order sought to be revised is not contrary to law. Hence, the instant appeal

arises therefrom.

It clearly, appears upon a careful scrutiny of his showing cause, that the

position so taken up by the Appellant in the Magistrate Court of Embilipitiya is

mainly, two-fold, namely;

1) Land is not a State Land within the meaning of the Act but, a private

land belonging to him in terms of the pedigree pleaded in his showing

cause;

CA/PHC/0237/2019

Page 5 of 24

2) The Respondent is not the competent authority within the meaning of

section 18 of the Act to be read with section 22 of the Sri Lanka

Mahaweli Authority Act.

Let me now, deal with them separately.

1) Land is not a State Land within the meaning of the Act but, a private

land belonging to him in terms of the pedigree pleaded in his showing

cause;

It is in this context, I would think it expedient at this juncture to examine the

structure and/or the scheme embodied in the Act and the provisions contained

therein with regard to an application that may be made to a Magistrate Court

by a competent authority under section 5 thereof for the eviction of a person

who in his opinion, is in unauthorized possession or occupation of a state land

and for the recovery of the same.

Section 3 of the Act enacts thus;

“3. (1) Where a competent authority is of the opinion

(a) that any land is State land; and

(b) that any person is in unauthorized possession or

occupation of such land, the competent authority may serve

a notice on such person in possession or occupation thereof,

or where the competent authority considers such service

impracticable or inexpedient, exhibit such notice in a

conspicuous place in or upon that land requiring such

person to vacate such land with his dependants, if any, and

to deliver vacant possession of such land to such competent

authority or other authorized person as may be specified in

the notice on or before a specified date. The date to be

specified in such notice shall be a date not less than thirty

CA/PHC/0237/2019

Page 6 of 24

days from the date of the issue or the exhibition of such

notice.

(1A) No person shall be entitled to any hearing or to make any

representation in respect of a notice under subsection (1).

(2) Every notice under subsection (1) issued in respect of any

State land is in this Act referred to as a "quit notice ".

(3) A quit notice in respect of any State land shall be deemed

to have been served on the person in possession or

occupation thereof if such notice is sent by registered post.

(4) Every quit notice shall be in Form A set out in the

Schedule to this Act.”

Section 4 of the Act deals with the obligation to comply with a quit notice and it

enacts thus;

“4. Where a quit notice has been served or exhibited under section 3

(a) the person in possession or occupation of the land to whom such

notice relates or any dependants of such person shall not be entitled to

possess or occupy such land after the date specified in such notice or to

object to such notice on any ground whatsoever except as provided for in

section 9,

(b) the person in possession or occupation shall together with his

dependants, if any, duly vacate such land and deliver vacant possession

thereof to the competent authority or person to whom he is required to

do so by such notice.”

Section 5 of the Act deals with the effect of non-compliance with a quit notice

and it enacts thus;

CA/PHC/0237/2019

Page 7 of 24

5. (1) Where any person fails to comply with the notice provisions of

section 4 (b) in respect of any quit notice issued or exhibited or

purporting to have been issued or exhibited under this Act, any

competent authority (whether he is or not the competent authority who

issued or exhibited such notice) may make an application in writing in

the Form B set out in the Schedule to this Act to the Magistrate's Court

within whose local jurisdiction such land or any part thereof is situated

(a) setting forth the following matters

(i) that he is a competent authority for the purposes of this

Act.

(ii) that the land described in the schedule to the application

is in his opinion State land,

(iii) that a quit notice was issued on the person in possession

or occupation of such land or was exhibited in a

conspicuous place in or upon such land,

(iv) that such person named in the application is in his

opinion in unauthorized possession or occupation of such

land and has failed to comply with the provisions of the

aforesaid paragraph (b) of section 4 in respect of such notice

relating to such land, and

(b) praying for the recovery of possession of such land and for an

order of ejectment of such person in possession or occupation and

his dependants, if any, from such land.

(2) Every such application under subsection (1) shall be supported by an

affidavit in the Form C set out in the Schedule to this Act verifying to the

matters set forth in such application and shall be accompanied by a copy

of the quit notice.

CA/PHC/0237/2019

Page 8 of 24

(3) Every application supported by an affidavit and accompanied by a

copy of the quit notice under the preceding provisions of this section

shall be referred to as an " application for ejectment ".

(4) No stamp duties shall be payable for any application for ejectment.

Section 6 of the Act deals with the role of a Magistrate upon receipt of an

application made under section 5 thereof and it enacts thus;

“6. (1) Upon receipt of the application made under section 5, the

Magistrate shall forthwith issue summons on the person named in the

application to appear and show cause on the date specified in such

summons (being a date not later than two weeks from the date of issue of

such summons) why such person and his dependants, if any, should not

be ejected from the land as prayed for in the application for ejectment.

(2) The provisions contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure Act shall,

mutatis mutandis, apply to the issue of summons referred to in

subsection (1) and the service thereof and other steps necessary for

securing the attendance of the person summoned.”

Section 7 of the Act, makes provisions for an order for ejectment where no

cause is shown and it reads thus;

“7. If on the date specified in the summons issued under section 6 the

person on whom such summons was issued fails to appear or informs

the Court that he has no cause to show against the order for ejectment,

the Court shall forthwith issue an order directing such person and his

dependants, if any, to be ejected forthwith from the land.”

Section 8 of the Act, makes provisions as to the inquiry if cause is shown and it

enacts thus;

“8. (1) If a person on whom summons has been served under section 6

appears on the date specified in such summons and states that he has

CA/PHC/0237/2019

Page 9 of 24

cause to show against the issue of an order for ejectment the Magistrate's

Court may proceed forthwith to hear and determine the matter or may

set the case for inquiry on a later date.

(2) Where any application for ejectment has been made to a Magistrate's

Court, the Magistrate shall give priority over all other business of that

Court, to the hearing and disposal of such application, except when

circumstances render it necessary for such other business to be disposed

of earlier.”

Section 9 of the Act deals with the scope of inquiry and it reads thus;

“9. (1) At such inquiry the person on whom summons under section 6

has been served shall not be entitled to contest any of the matters

stated in the application under section 5 except that such person

may establish that he is in possession or occupation of the land

upon a valid permit or other written authority of the State granted

in accordance with any written law and that such permit or

authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid.

(2) It shall not be competent to the Magistrate's Court to call for any

evidence from the competent authority in support of the application

under section 5.” [Emphasis is mine]

Section 10 of the Act makes provisions for order of ejectment and it reads as

follows;

“10. (1) If after inquiry the Magistrate is not satisfied that the person

showing cause is entitled to the possession or occupation of the land he

shall make order directing such person and his dependants, if any, in

occupation of such land to be ejected forthwith from such land.

(2) No appeal shall lie against any order of ejectment made by a

Magistrate under subsection (1).”

CA/PHC/0237/2019

Page 10 of 24

Upon a careful analysis of section 3 of the Act in conjunction with sections 9(1)

which enacts that “At such inquiry the person on whom summons under

section 6 has been served shall not be entitled to contest any of the

matters stated in the application under section 5 except that such person

may establish that he is in possession or occupation of the land upon a

valid permit or other written authority of the State granted in accordance

with any written law and that such permit or authority is in force and not

revoked or otherwise rendered invalid” and 9(2) thereof, which enacts “It

shall not be competent to the Magistrate's Court to call for any evidence

from the competent authority in support of the application under section

5.”, it would become manifest that where the competent authority is of the

opinion that; a) any land is state land, and b) that any person is in

unauthorized possession or occupation of such land, the competent

authority may serve a notice by any of the modes set out therein on such

person in possession or occupation thereof, requiring such person to vacate

such land with his dependents if any, and to deliver vacant possession of such

land to competent authority or any other authorized person as may be specified

in the notice on or before a specified date to be specified therein; and that at

such inquiry the person on whom summons under section 6 has been

served shall not be entitled to contest any of the matters stated in the

application under section 5 except that such person may establish that he

is in possession or occupation of the land upon a valid permit or other

written authority of the State granted in accordance with any written law

and that such permit or authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise

rendered invalid; and that It shall not be competent to the Magistrate's

Court to call for any evidence from the competent authority in support of

the application under section 5. [Emphasis is mine]

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in Farook vs. Gunewardene-Government

Agent, Amparai 1980 (2) SLR 243, at pages 245 and 246 that, “Section 9(2)

CA/PHC/0237/2019

Page 11 of 24

is to the effect that the Magistrate cannot call for any evidence from the

competent authority in support of the application under section 5, which

means that the Magistrate cannot call upon the competent authority to prove

that the land described in the schedule to the application is a State Land

(Section 5(1)(a)(ii))......The structure of the Act would also make it appear that

where the competent authority had formed the opinion that any land is state

land, even, the Magistrate is not competent to question his opinion. Alternative

relief is given by section 12 which empowers any person claiming to be the

owner of a land to institute action against state for the vindication of his title

within 6 months from the date of the order of ejectment and section 13 is to the

effect that where action is instituted by a person, if a decision is made in favour

of that person, he will be entitled to recover reasonable compensation for the

damage sustained by the reason of his having been compelled to deliver

possession of such land...”.

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA/PHC/41/2010 decided on

31.01.2017 that, “The party noticed is not entitled to challenge the opinion of

the competent authority on any of the matters stated in the application....By

this amendment, the opinion of the competent authority in relation to the state

land was made unquestionable....”.

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA (PHC) APN 29/2016-decided on

09.07.2018 that, “....He cannot contest any of the matters stated in the

application made under section 5 of the Act. One of the matters required to be

stated in the application is that the land described in the schedule to the

application is in the opinion of the competent authority state land. This fact

cannot be contested by the person summoned....Hence, a dispute on the

identity of the land cannot arise for consideration of the learned Magistrate.

The identity of the land can arise for consideration only to the extent of

examining whether the valid permit or other written authority produced by the

party summoned is in relation to the state land described in the application.

CA/PHC/0237/2019

Page 12 of 24

Where it is not, the Magistrate must issue an order of eviction in terms of the

Act...”

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA(PHC)48/2016-decided on

02.09.2025 that, “Under section 9 of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession)

Act, as amended in 1983, the competent authority’s opinion that land is a

‘state land’ is conclusive and not open to judicial challenge at the ejectment

stage and the only permissible defence available to an occupier is to prove

possession or occupation under a valid permit or written authority issued by

the state with the burden of proof resting on the occupier, whose failure to

establish such authority would necessitate an order of ejectment.”

Upon a plain reading of section 3(1) of the Act together with sections 9(1) and

9(2) thereof and the judicial precedents referred to above, it becomes

abundantly, clear that, where the competent authority had formed an opinion

that any land is state land, even, the Magistrate is not competent to question

his opinion and therefore, not open to judicial challenge at the ejectment stage

in an application made to Court by a competent authority under section 5 of

the Act.

In the light of the law set out in section 3(1) of the Act to be read with sections

9(1) and 9(2) thereof and in the light of the law established by the judicial

precedents as referred to above, it is my considered view that a dispute as to

the identity of the land-the subject matter of the application under section 5 of

the Act, is wholly, foreign and utterly alien to a proceedings that may be

initiated before a Magistrate Court by a competent authority for eviction

of a person who in his opinion, is in unauthorized possession or occupation of

a land which in his opinion, is state land and therefore, such a defence to an

application made to Court by a competent authority under section 5 of the Act

is wholly, untenable in law, and therefore, not in any manner available to such

a person who in his opinion of the competent authority, is in unauthorized

possession or occupation of a state land for; the Legislature in enacting section

CA/PHC/0237/2019

Page 13 of 24

9 of the Act had never intended a defence as such to be made available to a

person as such except only, for the defence expressly, and explicitly, made

available therein.[Emphasis is mine]

There is a further point which would in my opinion, fortify and strengthen my

view taken as aforesaid and let me now, examine it.

Upon a careful analysis of the Act, it becomes abundantly, clear that “Urgency”

appears to be the hallmark of this Act as observed by this Court in Farook vs.

Gunewardene-Government Agent, Amparai (Supra). Under section 3, 30

days notice shall be given. Under section 4, the person in possession is not

entitled to object to notice on any ground whatsoever except as provided for in

section 9 and the person who is in possession is required to vacate the land

within the month specified by the notice. Under section 6, the Magistrate is

required to issue summons forthwith to appear and show cause on a date not

later than two weeks from the date of issue of such summons. Under section

8(2) the Magistrate is required to give priority over all other business of that

court. Under section 9, the party noticed can raise objections only on the basis

of a valid permit issued by the State. Under section 10, if the Magistrate is not

satisfied, “he shall make order directing ejectment forthwith and no appeal

shall lie against the order of ejectment. Under section 17, the provisions of this

Act have effect notwithstanding anything contained in any written law.

Besides, it was inter-alia, held by the Supreme Court in Senanayake Vs.

Damunupola-1982 (2) SLR 621 that, “The scope of the State Land (Recovery

of Possession) Act was to provide a speedy or summary mode of getting back

possession or occupation of ‘State Land’ as defined in the Act”, which was cited

with approval by this Court in case bearing No. CA (PHC) 140/2013-decided

on 10.10.2019.

Hence, it becomes abundantly, clear upon a careful analysis of sections 9(1)

and 9(2) of the Act in particular that the Legislature in enacting this special

CA/PHC/0237/2019

Page 14 of 24

piece of legislation, had never intended for a protracted trial to be held by a

Magistrate in an application made to it by a competent authority under section

5 of the Act when it had enacted section 9 thereto expressly, and explicitly,

setting out in unambiguous terms the scope of such an inquiry.

In the light of the above, the scope of the State Land (Recovery of Possession)

Act is to provide a speedy or summary mode of getting back possession or

occupation of ‘State Land’ as defined in the Act as explicitly, observed by the

Supreme Court in the decision in Senanayake Vs. Damunupola (Supra).

The learned Counsel for the Appellant sought to contend by relying on the

decisions of this Court in CA/WRT/293/2017-decided on 18.11.2019 and

reported in 2019 (3) SLR 430 and Edwin Vs. Thillakaratne-2001(3) SLR 34

that in view of the fact that the only material tendered to the Magistrate’s Court

and relied on by the Respondent to form his opinion under section 3 of the Act

is Gazette No. 137 dated 16.04.1981 published under the provisions of the

Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka Act No. 23 of 1979; and that the Gazette

merely, declares the area of the land in Walawe Ganga Basin which is

mentioned in the schedule to the said Gazette as a “Special Area” in terms of

section 3 of the Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka Act No. 23 of 1979; and that

these statutory framework demonstrate that, declarations made for

administrative or development purposes serves delineate areas for planning

and development do not in law, extinguish private property rights or vest

ownership in the relevant authority; and that it is common ground that the

land in question is included in the “Special Area” declared under and in terms

of section 3 of the Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka Act No. 23 of 1979 and

published in the said Gazette (R2); and that a mere declaration under section 3

of the Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka Act No. 23 of 1979 identifying an area

as a “Special Area” does not vest title or confer ownership of lands within that

area on the Mahaweli Authority; and that, such a declaration merely,

designates the administrative boundaries of the “Special Area” for the Mahaweli

CA/PHC/0237/2019

Page 15 of 24

Authority to exercise, perform and discharge all or any of its powers, duties

and functions conferred on the Authority by the Act and that the declaration

made under section 3 of the Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka Act No. 23 of

1979 does not operate as a mechanism for the transfer of legal title to the

authority; and that the sections 23 and 24 of the Mahaweli Authority of Sri

Lanka Act No. 23 of 1979 provides the authority two mechanisms to acquire

titles to lands inside a designated “Special Area”; and that the land in question

was not acquired by the Mahaweli Authority under section 23 and or 24 of

thereof and there is no evidence produced by the Respondent in this regard;

and that in any event, if the land in question was acquired by the authority

under section 23 of the Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka Act No. 23 of 1979 can

eject the Appellant therefrom only under the provisions of the Land Acquisition

Act; and that if the land in question was possessed by the authority under

section 24 of the Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka Act No. 23 of 1979, the

authority can eject the appellant from the said land only under section 24 (7)

thereof; and that in the circumstances, the Respondent could not have

reasonably, formed an opinion under section 3 of Act that the land in

question is State Land vested with the Mahaweli Authority. [Emphasis is

mine]

What was said by this Court in Edwin Vs. Thillakaratne (Supra) was that,

acquisition cannot be made under one Act and ejectment cannot be sought

under another Act; and that ejectment also ought to be effected under same

Act as that under which the acquisition was made-more so, as that Act itself

provides for a remedy or procedure to be followed for the ejectment of persons

in occupation of the land acquired and not that, a person in unauthorized

possession or occupation in a “Special Area” declared by the provisions of

the section 3 of the Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka Act No. 23 of 1979

cannot be ejected under the provisions of the Act but, under provisions of

the Land Acquisition Act. Hence, it clearly, appears to me that such a

CA/PHC/0237/2019

Page 16 of 24

contention was advanced by the Appellant in appeal upon a total

misconception of the law as set out above and therefore, it should be rejected

in-limine. [Emphasis is mine]

Moreover, the contention so advanced by the learned Counsel for the Appellant

is not entitled to succeed in law on several other reasons too; one being that

the decisions relied on by the learned Counsel for the Appellant was a

decisions made by this Court in Writ applications and the key considerations

in Writ jurisdiction are totally, different from the key considerations in an

application under section 5 of the Act and therefore, the facts of the cases

relied on by the learned Counsel can be clearly, distinguishable from the facts

of the instant case and therefore, the decisions relied on by the learned

Counsel for the Appellant have if I may say so respectfully, no bearing on the

facts of the instant application made to Court by the Respondent being the

competent authority under section 5 of the Act; and the other reason being

that the opinion of the competent authority that the land in dispute is State

Land, cannot in any manner, be questioned by a person summoned to show

cause under section 6 of the Act, in view of the provisions in section 3, sections

9(1) and 9(2) of the Act and in view of the binding judicial precedents cited

above; and the next reason being that upon a careful reading of section 22 of

the Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka Act No. 23 of 1979 together with the

schedule B thereto, it shows beyond any doubt that Mahaweli Authority has

been vested with all the powers to make an application under section 5 of the

Act to eject a person from any land declared by section 3 of the Mahaweli

Authority of Sri Lanka Act No. 23 of 1979 to be “Special Area” who in the

opinion of the competent authority, is in unauthorized possession or

occupation thereof as clearly, held by this Court in CA/PHC/103/2011–

Decided on 30.11.2016 to the following effect that, “The section 22 of the

Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka Act No. 23 of 1979 as amended by Act No. 59

of 1993 endorses that, the State Land (Recovery of Possession) Act applies to

CA/PHC/0237/2019

Page 17 of 24

“Special Areas” and employee of the Authority as is authorized in that behalf by

the Authority can exercise the powers under the Act.”

Besides, section 22 of the Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka Act No. 23 of 1979

makes provisions for the “Special Powers for the Authority in Special Area”,

whereas, section 23 thereof makes provision “for compulsory acquisition of

land in any Special Area” for the Authority and section 24 thereof, provides

“for the possession of land in any “Special Area” otherwise than under the

Land Acquisition Act” and hence, sections 22, 23 and 24 of the Mahaweli

Authority of Sri Lanka Act No. 23 of 1979 had been enacted by the legislature

to achieve different purposes as provided for therein. Hence, it clearly, appears

that such a contention was advanced by the Appellant in appeal as a result of

his total failure to differentiate the key objectives intended to be achieved by

the legislature by enacting the sections 22, 23 and 24 to the Mahaweli

Authority of Sri Lanka Act No. 23 of 1979.

In the light of the above, I would find myself unable to agree with the

contention so advanced by the learned Counsel for the Appellant for; it cannot

sustain in law and as such it ought to be rejected in-limine.

In view of the law set out above, the Appellant in the instant appeal cannot in

any manner, contest any of the matters stated in the application made under

section 5 of the Act by the Respondent to the Magistrate Court of Embilipitiya.

One of the matters so required to be stated in the application under section 5

of the Act is that the land described in the schedule to the application, is in the

opinion of the Respondent being the competent authority, State Land. Opinion

so formed by the Respondent being the competent authority, that it is in his

opinion, State Land, cannot in any manner, be contested by the Appellant who

was summoned under section 6 of the Act in view of sections 9(1) and 9(2) of

the Act.

CA/PHC/0237/2019

Page 18 of 24

Hence, dispute on the identity of the land morefully described in the schedule

to the instant application made to Court by the Respondent, being the

competent authority under section 5 of the Act, namely; whether the land

stated in the instant application is not state land but a private land as raised

by the Appellant in his showing cause before the Magistrate Court of

Embilipitiya, cannot in law, be raised by him for consideration of the learned

Magistrate of Embilipitiya for; he has expressly, been prevented and precluded

by section 9(1) and 9(2) of the Act by raising a contest as such inasmuch as

this is an issue to be adjudicated upon in appropriate proceedings by a Court

of competent jurisdiction for; such a dispute as to the identity of the land in

question, is utterly, foreign and alien to proceedings as such initiated by

the competent authority under section 5 of the Act. [Emphasis is mine]

Hence, I would hold that the contention advanced by the Appellant in the

Magistrate Court that the land in question is not State Land but, a private

land, ought to fail in law as rightly, held by the learned Additional Magistrate of

Embilipitiya.

The question that would next, arise for our consideration is as to the scope of

the inquiry in proceedings that may be initiated by a competent authority

under section 5 of the Act in a Magistrate Court and section 9 of the Act sets

out the scope of the inquiry and it may be reproduced verbatim the same as

follows;

“9. (1) At such inquiry the person on whom summons under section 6

has been served shall not be entitled to contest any of the matters

stated in the application under section 5 except that such person

may establish that he is in possession or occupation of the land

upon a valid permit or other written authority of the State granted

in accordance with any written law and that such permit or

authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid.

CA/PHC/0237/2019

Page 19 of 24

(2) It shall not be competent to the Magistrate's Court to call for any

evidence from the competent authority in support of the application

under section 5.” [Emphasis is mine]

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in Farook vs. Gunewardene-Government

Agent, Amparai (Supra) that, “At the inquiry before the Magistrate, the only

plea by way of defence that the Petitioner can put forward is that he is in

possession or occupation of the land upon a valid permit or other written

authority of the State granted in accordance with any written law and that

such permit or authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered

invalid.”

It was inter-alia, held in Muhandiram v. Chairman, No. 111, Janatha

EstateDevelopment Board 1992 (1) SLR 110 at page 112 that, “Under

section 9(1) of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act No. 7 of 1979, the

person on whom summons has been served (in this instance, the Respondent-

Petitioner) shall not be entitled to contest any of the matters stated in the

application under section 5 except that such person may establish that he is in

possession or occupation of the land upon a valid permit or other written

authority of the State granted in accordance with any written law and that

such permit or written authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise

rendered invalid...... The said section clearly reveals that at an inquiry of this

nature, the person on whom the summons has been served has to establish

that his possession or occupation is upon a valid permit or other written

authority of the State granted according to the written law. The burden of proof

of that fact lies on that particular person on whom the summons has been

served and appears before the relevant Court.”.

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA/PHC/41/2010(Supra) that, “Under

section 9 of the State Land (Recovery of Possession) Act, the scope of the

inquiry is limited to the person noticed to establish he is not in unauthorized

occupation or possession by establishing that;

CA/PHC/0237/2019

Page 20 of 24

1. Occupying the land on a permit or a written authority.

2. It must be a valid permit or a written authority.

3. It must be in force at the time of presenting it to Court.

4. It must have been issued in accordance with any written law.”

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA (PHC) APN 29/2016(Supra) that, “A

person who has been summoned in terms of section 6 of the Act can only

establish that, he is in possession or occupation of the land upon a valid

permit or other written authority of the State granted in accordance with any

written law and that such permit or authority is in force and not revoked or

otherwise rendered invalid. He cannot contest any of the matters stated in the

application under section 5 of the Act.”

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA(PHC)48/2016 (Supra) that, “.... the

only defence available is to prove possession is upon a valid permit or written

authority, issued in accordance with law, and which should be in force....”.

In the light of the law set out in section 9 of the Act and the judicial precedent

referred to above, at an inquiry of this nature, the person on whom the

summons has been served (in this instance the Appellant) has to establish that

his possession or occupation is upon a valid permit or other written authority

of the State granted according to the written law and that such permit or

written authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid.

It is significant to observe that, it had never been the position of the Appellant

taken up in the Magistrate Court that his possession or occupation of the land

in dispute which in the opinion of the Respondent being the competent

authority is State Land, is upon a valid permit or other written authority of the

State granted according to the written law and that such permit or written

authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid, but, a

private land which belongs to him in terms of the pedigree recited in his

showing cause.

CA/PHC/0237/2019

Page 21 of 24

Although there is no duty as such cast upon a competent authority by the

provisions of the Act, nonetheless, the Respondent being the competent

authority had identified the State Land as being a part of lot 3458 in extent of 1

Rood, 12.84 Perches as morefully, shown and depicted in the Plan bearing No.

w...mß 779 අ࿛ෙႁක 21 (Final Village Plan 779-Supplementary 21) which is the

possession of Surveyor-General.(Vide-Schedule to the application made to

Court by the Respondent under section 5 of the Act)

Hence, the Appellant’s argument that the land is not a state land but, a private

land claimed by him by virtue of the pedigree pleaded in his showing cause

filed before the Magistrate Court of Embilipitiya, cannot sustain at least, for

two reasons; one being that, he is precluded by section 9(1) and 9(2) of the Act

from raising such a contest on the land-the subject matter of the application

made to Court by the Respondent being the competent authority; the other

being that although, the Respondent-being the competent authority does not

have any burden in an inquiry before the Magistrate so to do, nevertheless, the

land in dispute had been properly, identified by the Respondent being the

competent authority with reference to a plan previously, made and prepared by

the Surveyor-General. [Emphasis is mine]

On the other hand, the Respondent being the competent authority had already,

formed an opinion that the land-the subject matter of the application, is a

State Land and that the Appellant is in unauthorized possession or occupation

therein. However, as observed by me elsewhere in this judgment, it is

significant to note that, not an iota of evidence had been adduced by the

Appellant to establish that he is in possession or occupation of the State Land

upon a valid permit or other written authority of the State, granted in

accordance with any written law and that such permit or authority is in force

and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid as required by section 9 of the

Act. Hence, the Appellant did not have semblance of such a permit or authority

as envisaged by section 9 of the Act.

CA/PHC/0237/2019

Page 22 of 24

In view of the above, it clearly, appears to me that the Appellant had adduced

not even an iota of evidence to satisfy the learned Additional Magistrate of

Embilipitiya that he was entitled to the possession or occupation of the State

Land as rightly, held by the learned Additional Magistrate of Embilipitiya.

Hence, I would hold that, the contention advanced by the learned Counsel for

the Appellant that, the land in dispute is not a state land but, a private land

belonging to the Appellant as asserted by him in his showing cause, is not

entitled to succeed, both in fact and law and as such, it should inevitably, fail.

2) The Respondent is not the competent authority within the meaning of

section 18 of the Act to be read with section 22 of the Sri Lanka

Mahaweli Authority Act.

It may now, be examined.

In view of sections 9 (1) and 9(2) of the Act, the person who has been

summoned is not entitled to contest any of the matters stated in the

application under section 5 of the Act and one of such matters to be stated in

the application made under Section 5 of the Act is that the person making the

application is a competent authority for the purposes of the Act.

I have already, found elsewhere in this judgment that, in view of section 22 of

the Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka Act No. 23 of 1979 read together with the

schedule B thereto, Mahaweli Authority has been vested with all the powers to

make an application under section 5 of the Act to eject a person from any land

declared by section 3 of the Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka Act No. 23 of 1979

as “Special Area” who in the opinion of the competent authority, is in

unauthorized possession or occupation thereof and it was clearly, held by this

Court in CA/PHC/103/2011–Decided on 30.11.2016 to the following effect

that, “The section 22 of the Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka Act No. 23 of 1979

as amended by Act No. 59 of 1993 endorses that, the State Land (Recovery of

Possession) Act applies to “Special Areas” and employee of the Authority as is

CA/PHC/0237/2019

Page 23 of 24

authorized in that behalf by the Authority can exercise the powers under the

Act.”

Besides, the Respondent had in his affidavit filed along with his application

under section 5 of the Act before the Magistrate Court of Embilipitiya clearly,

and unequivocally, affirmed to the fact he is the competent authority within the

meaning of the Act which fact cannot in any manner, be contested by the

Appellant in view of sections 9(1) and 9(2) of the Act.

Furthermore, it was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA(PHC)APN

29/2016(supra) that “The Petitioner submitted that the Respondent was not

the competent authority in respect of the lands vested with the SLSPC. Such

an objection is not a matter that can be taken up before the learned Magistrate

or in these proceedings. One of the factors to be stated in the application made

under section 5 of the Act is that the person making the application is a

competent authority for the purposes of the Act. In view of section 6 of the Act,

a person who has been summoned cannot contest that the claimant is not a

competent authority. That is an issue to be tested in appropriate proceedings.”

Hence, I would hold that, the next contention advanced by the learned Counsel

for the Appellant, namely; the Respondent is not a competent authority within

the meaning of the “Act”, cannot in any manner, sustain both in fact and law

and therefore, it too, should be rejected.

Hence, I would hold that the learned Additional Magistrate of Embilipitiya was

entirely, justified both in fact and law in making an order directing the

Appellant and his dependents, if any, in occupation of the State Land as

morefully, described in the schedule to the application made to Court by the

Respondent being the competent authority, to be ejected forthwith therefrom.

In the circumstances, I would see no error both in fact and law in the order of

the learned Additional Magistrate of Embilipitiya and therefore, it can sustain

CA/PHC/0237/2019

Page 24 of 24

both in fact and law as rightly, held by the learned High Court Judge of the

Sabaragamuwa Province holden at Embilipitiya

Hence, I would see no error both in fact and law in the order of the learned

High Court Judge of the Sabaragamuwa Province holden at Embilipitiya too,

when he had proceeded to dismiss the application in revision filed by the

Appellant before the High Court inviting it to invoke its extra-ordinary

revisionary jurisdiction to revise and set aside the order of the learned

Additional Magistrate of Embilipitiya by holding that, the order sought to be

revised is not contrary to law.

In view of the foregoing, I would hold that, the instant appeal is not entitled to

succeed both in fact and law.

Hence, I would proceed to dismiss the instant appeal with costs of this court

and the courts below.

In the result, I would affirm the orders of both the learned High Court Judge of

the Sabaragamuwa Province holden at Embilipitiya and the learned Additional

Magistrate of Embilipitiya.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL