Page 1 of 10

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under and in terms

of Article 138 (1) of the Constitution read with

the Section 11 (1) of the High Court of the

Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of

1990 with the Section 331 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka

Complainant

Court of Appeal Case No:

HCC/287/18

HC Colombo Case No. 2401/05

1. Dasanayaka Mudiyanselage Amal

Dhammika

2. Dharmaseelan Premakindan

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Dassanayaka Mudiyanselage Amal

Dhammika

Accused Appellant

v.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12

Complainant-Respondent

Page 2 of 10

Before: Menaka Wijesundera, J.

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Counsel: Indica Mallawaratchy for the Accused-

Appellant

Hiranjan Peries, SDSD for the Respondent.

Written 28.04.2021 (by the Accused-Appellant)

Submissions: 02.10.2019(by the Respondent)

On

Argued On: 23.11.2023

Decided On: 14.12.2023

Sasi Mahendran, J.

The Accused Appellant, (hereinafter referred to as the Accused) and the 2nd

Accused (Dharmasirilan Premakindan who has been absconding ) along with two other

unknown to the prosecution was indicted in the High Court of Colombo for committing

the murder of Rathnasiri Geeganage alias Ralahami is an offence punishable under

Section 296 read together with section 32 of the Penal Code

After the trial, the Learned High Court Judge convicted the Accused for the

murder, and the death sentence was imposed.

Being aggrieved by the said conviction and sentence the Accused had preferred an

appeal to this court.

The main ground urged by the counsel for the Accused was that the Learned High

Court Judge had not evaluated the probability of the evidence of the PW02,

Page 3 of 10

The following facts and circumstances are briefly summarised:

According to PW01, Preethi Shantha Geeganage the brother of the deceased stated

that, after going to watch the Shaja Match at their neighbors place, he and his wife came

home. Thereafter they went to bed and his brother(deceased) has been sleeping in the

living area. At around 11 pm, there was a knock on the door, and he asked his wife to go

and check who it was, in the meantime, he looked out through the window and saw four

individuals standing. The windows did not have any grills. According to him, he had been

away from the scene and had heard a gunshot on his way,

PW02 the wife of Pw01 opened the door and she recognized the 1st Accused Amal

whom she had known for years. Along with him, two other individuals have barged in,

and at the same time, another individual has jumped into the house through the window

with a pistol in hand. In her evidence, she admitted she did not question his visit apart

from the fact that she had told the individual who came in from the window not to trample

the pillow.

She further mentioned that the 1st Accused had gotten the pistol from the other

individual and shot the deceased.

The question before us is that according to PW01 he knew the 1st Accused and was

a neighbor for the last 15 years. He mentioned that he had asked his wife to put on the

light when they heard the noise. It was he who had asked the wife to open the door. There

he has also seen the four individuals whom he has not recognized. Further, it was

mentioned that another individual came through the window and he followed him.

Page 116 of the Appeal Brief

: ?

: . .

: ?

: .

: ?

: .

..

: ?

: . .

Page 4 of 10

: ?

: .

: ?

: . .

: ?

: .

When we analyze the evidence of PW02 who is the wife of PW01. she stated that

she had gone to watch a match at the neighbor's house and after coming back while they

were sleeping, at 11 oclock she heard a knock on the door. And through the window, she

saw the 1st Accused and the other 3 individuals standing outside. Then she opened the

door letting them inside, and in the meantime, the 2nd Accused whom she had identified

at the identification parade came through the window carrying the pistol, this witness

testified that her husband PW01 was present with her at that time. Further, in the cross-

examination, she mentions that her husband has asked her to open the door. she also

mentioned that she had seen the 1st Accused shooting the deceased.

When we peruse the judgment, the Learned High Court Judge has come to the

conclusion that PW01 could have not identified the Accused as he was not present near

the door when PW02 opened the door for the other Accused to come in. According to PW02

when she opened the door PW01 was there and even PW01 admitted that he had seen all

four-unknown people outside his premises. He further admitted that he had seen the

person who came through the window with the gun. It shows that PW01 was there at the

time when all four came in. There is a possibility that he could have seen all four of them

when they entered.

When we perused the judgment, in page 386 of the Appeal brief we observed the

following reasons were given by the Learned High Court Judge to believe the story of

PW01,

.. 01 . . .. 02 .

Page 5 of 10

. .. 02 .

.

. 02 . .. 01 . 01 . 01 . , 01 . 01 .

.

. 01 , 01 . 01 .

We hold that this is a misdirection of evidence. We are mindful of the dictum

observed by , Macdonnel CJ in King v. Gunaratne and Another, CLR V.14 page 144 held

that:

This is an appeal mainly on facts from a Court which saw and heard the witnesses

to a Court which has not seen or heard them, and in dealing with this judgment I have to

apply the three tests, as they seem to be, which a Court of Appeal must apply to an appeal

coming to it on questions of fact. Can we say that the verdict of the learned District Judge,

namely, that these people are guilty, was unreasonably. against the, weight of the

evidence adduced on both sides? Clearly it is not possible to say that. Can we say that

there has been any misdirection either on the law or on the evidence? (emphasis added)

Again I do not think it would be possible to say so. There was a point of law argued here

that accused had no intention to cause loss in the end. I have dealt with that, and properly

understood, I do not think it is a misdirection in law at all. I do not remember any other

point that was seriously raised to this Court as a misdirection, Then there is the third

ground of interference, that the Court of trial has drawn the wrong inferences from matter

in evidence which is as much before this Court as. it. was before the Court of trial, for

instance, documents. Again, I do not think it can be said that there has been any wrong

inferences drawn by the Court of trial. On the contrary, the documents put in seem,

rightly apprehended, to support the findings of fact arrived at by the learned District

Judge.

Page 6 of 10

Later Justice Ranasinghe, J (as was then ) in Jajathsena and Others v. G,D,D.

Perera, Inspector,1992 (1) SLR 371. Has relied on the above judgment and held that

The principles laid down by the authorities, referred to above, make it clear: that, although the findings of a Magistrate on questions of fact are entitled to great weight, yet, it is the duty of the Appellate Court to test, both intrinsically and extrinsically the evidence led at the trial: that, if after a close and careful examination of such evidence, the Appellate Court entertains a strong doubt as to the guilt of the accused, the Appellate Court must give the accused the benefit of such doubt.

Therefore, we hold that there is a clear misdirection by the High Court Judge.

The next question arises, concerning the probability of evidence of PW02.

According to PW02, she has identified the 1st Accused through his voice and even

when she saw him upon opening the door. PW01 is the person who asked PW02 to open

the door. PW01 states that even though he has known the Accused for 15 years he couldnt

identify him at the time of the incident. It is strange to note that although PW01 and

PW02 were present at the incident only PW02 was able to identify him. Both witnesses

were present at the time PW02 identified the Accused.

The Conduct of PW02 is not that which is expected of a prudent, reasonable person.

In the position of PW02 who claims to have known the Accused for the last 15 years, at

the least she could have asked the accused inquiring about the purpose for him to come

that night with unknown individuals, or would have told her husband about the accused

or when she saw the gun she should have shouted.

We are mindful that before the incident they had gone to a neighbor's house to

watch the match. Because the 1st witness couldnt identify the 1st Accused whom he had

known for about 15 years, where the PW02 states that she opened the door upon

recognizing the Accused voice creates doubt.

Further, we observe the conduct of PW02, without informing her husband, and

inquiring about the Accused creates doubt as to whether they were present at the time of

that incident.

A similar incident was discussed in the following judgment;

Page 7 of 10

Ismail, J in Wijepala v. The Attorney-General, 2001 (1) 46 in page 58,

Learned President's Counsel for the appellant submitted, however, that the

testimony of Senaratne was completely untrustworthy and of such poor quality that a

conviction against the appellant cannot possibly be sustained in law. His testimonial

trustworthiness on vital aspects relating to the incident was assailed in an attempt to cast

a doubt even in regard to his presence at the time the deceased had received the fatal stab

injury.

Senaratne stated in his evidence that he took his injured son in a car to the

hospital. The Gramasevaka Jayapala testified that he provided his car for the purpose

and that he himself accompanied Senaratne and his injured son in the car to the hospital.

Although the Gramasevaka testified that Senaratne was known to him, there is no

evidence that Senaratne revealed the identity of the assailant to him that night or even

thereafter. The failure of Senaratne to inform the Gramasevaka of the identity of the

assailant therefore raises a serious doubt in regard to the presence of Senaratne at the

scene of the incident and his claim to have identified the appellant as the assailant.

Applying the test of spontaneity, his belatedness reduces the weight of his evidence and

affects his credibility.

The evidence of Senaratne who was the sole eyewitness to the incident is open to

suspicion. The trial judge has failed to appreciate that his evidence in regard to the

identity of the appellant has not been supported by any other item of evidence. There is

therefore a strong doubt as to the guilt of the appellant and, as such, the benefit of the

doubt should have been given to the appellant. The Court of Appeal has erred in affirming

the conviction without adequately testing the evidence of Senaratne. For these reasons, I

allow the appeal and set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal. The conviction and

sentence imposed on the appellant by the High Court are set aside and the appellant is

acquitted.

Further Rohini Marasinghe J. in Kalansuriya Alias Raja v. Attorney General,

2015 (1) SLR 415,

These facts are not corroborated by the witness's mother, his sister or by Piyal. In

fact Ak's testimony was directly contradicted by the two of them.

In her testimony, the witness Gnawathie (widow) stated that she did not see AK

before the stabbing She had seen the witness AK only at the time the deceased was taken

Page 8 of 10

to hospital by AK. She also stated in her testimony that AK did not mention to her about

the stabbing incident at any time during that period Strangely, the witness AK had

remained silent with the name of the assailant and the entire incident of stabbing which

he claimed to have witnessed that evening No reason had been advanced for this abnormal

behavior of AK's silence In these circumstances only rational reasoning that could be

given would be that AK had not seen the stabbing.

It is natural that the first question any reasonable person would ask in these

circumstances would be 'who did this?' It is strange that none of the witnesses mentioned

to each other the name of the assailant, when according to AK the name of the assailant

was known According to these witnesses there was no animosity between the deceased

and the appellant to cause harm to the deceased The witness Piyal does not state that he

met AK at the time the deceased was walking drunk and abusing Thilina. The witness

Piyal also denies that AK had mentioned the name of the assailant In fact his testimony

at pages 129 and 130 of the Brief, was that AK had not mentioned the name of the

assailant or that he saw the stabbing when AK got into the vehicle to take the deceased

to hospital.

The trial court ought to have addressed its mind to all these supportive facts,

before accepting those facts as proved and supportive evidence Therefore, the evidence of

the sole witness AK, we find to be untrustworthy as it was discredited by the other

witnesses The uncorroborated evidence is sufficient for a conviction if that evidence was

not contradicted on material points by other witnesses who were material witnesses

(Vide Sumanasena v Attorney General.

We mindful of the dictum of Akbar J; in The King v. Fernando, 32 NLR 251 held

that;

It has been held in the case of Milan Khan v. Sagai Bepari [ 23 I. L. R. Calcutta

347.] that the duty of the Appellate Court in a criminal case is not similar to that of an

Appellate Court in a civil case. In a criminal case, if the Judge of the Appellate Court has

any doubt that the conviction is a. right one, the accused should be discharged. In a civil

case the appellate Court must be satisfied before setting aside the order of the lower

Court that the order is wrong. Further, in a case reported in 17 Weekly Reporter

(Criminal), page 59, it was held that an Appellate Court was bound precisely in the same

way as the Court of first instance to test evidence extrinsically as well as intrinsically.

Page 9 of 10

Using this test, a strong doubt, as I have stated, has been created in my mind that the

conviction is right, and the benefit of this doubt must be reckoned in favour of the accused.

The conviction is set aside and the accused acquitted.

Considering the evidence led by PW02 we note that she has failed to inform her

husband who was with her at the time that she identified the first Accused. And also it is

strange to note that PW01 who has known the 1st Accused sometimes could not identify

the 1st Accused at that time. Therefore, this raises serious doubt regarding the presence

of both witnesses at the scene of the incident.

Further, we observed that any reasonable person would ask in these circumstances

at night, that is when a known person comes with an unknown person, what are you doing

here? Why have you come? According to PW02 she never questioned the 1st Accused.

The Learned Trial Judge ought to have addressed to his mind all these improbable facts.

I hold that the trial judge has failed to appreciate that the evidence of PW02 regarding

identity with regards to the 1st Accused was improbable.

Therefore, we hold that the prosecution has failed to prove the guilt of the Accused beyond

reasonable doubt.

For the above-mentioned reasons conviction and sentence imposed by the Learned High

Court Judge is set aside. And Accused is Acquitted.

Appeal Allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Menaka Wijesundera, J.

I AGREE

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Page 10 of 10