IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Abeysinghage Chandana Kumara,

No.148/A, Dadayankanda,

Omalpe, Ambilipitiya.

(Presently in Welikada Prison)

Petitioner

CASE NO: CA/WRIT/333/2011

Vs.

1. Kolitha Gunathilaka,

Air Vice Marshal,

Sri Lanka Air Force,

Sri Lanka Air Force Headquarters,

Colombo 2.

1A. Harsha Duminda Abeywickrama,

Air Vice Marshal,

Sri Lanka Air Force,

Sri Lanka Air Force Headquarters,

Colombo 2.

2. Naiduwa Handi Vijitha

Gunarathne,

Air Commodore,

Sri Lanka Air Force,

Sri Lanka Air Force Headquarters,

Colombo 2.

2

3. Kasthuri Arachchige Lakshman

Ranatunga,

Group Captain,

Sri Lanka Air Force,

Sri Lanka Air Force Headquarters,

Colombo 2.

4. Rajapaksha Minimuthu

Pathirannahalage Ranil

Suvendraraj Senaka

Dharmawardana,

Wing Commander,

Sri Lanka Air Force,

Sri Lanka Air Force Headquarters,

Colombo 2.

5. Jayasekara Palitha Balasooriya,

Wing Commander,

Sri Lanka Air Force,

Sri Lanka Air Force Headquarters,

Colombo 2.

6. Anuruddha Nammuni

Wijewardana,

Wing Commander,

Sri Lanka Air Force,

Sri Lanka Air Force Headquarters,

Colombo 2.

7. Kankanamlage Manoj Kumara

Keppetipola,

Wing Commander,

Sri Lanka Air Force,

3

Sri Lanka Air Force Headquarters,

Colombo 2.

8. Sampath Viranga Premawardana,

Squadron Leader,

Sri Lanka Air Force,

Sri Lanka Air Force Headquarters,

Colombo 2.

9. Sunddrappemma Arachchige Don

Channa Manjula Jayathilaka,

Squadron Leader,

Sri Lanka Air Force,

Sri Lanka Air Force Headquarters,

Colombo 2.

10. Vijith Kumara Malalagoda,

Air Commodore,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

11. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Darshana Kuruppu with Thanuja

Dissanayaka, Aruna Gamage, Chinthaka

Udadeniya and Menik Chandrasekara for the

Petitioner.

4

N. Rohantha Abeysuriya, P.C., A.S.G., for the

Respondents.

Argued on: 14.02.2020 and 04.03.2020

Decided on: 01.06.2020

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

1. Introduction

The Petitioner was an aircraftman of the volunteer force of the

Sri Lanka Air Force when he was convicted for murder by a

General Court Martial on 15.12.2010, under section 296 of the

Penal Code read with section 131(2) of the Air Force Act,1 and

sentenced to life imprisonment. Since then he has been serving

his sentence.

The Petitioner filed this application seeking to quash the said

conviction and sentence by way of a writ of certiorari.

Learned Counsel for the Petitioner challenges the said decision

on three grounds.

(a) The Court Martial had no jurisdiction to try the

Petitioner for the offence of murder, as he was not on

active service at the time material to the incident.

1 No.41 of 1949, as amended (hereinafter the Act or the Air Force Act).

5

(b) The finding of the Court Martial is contrary to Air Force

Court Martial Regulation No.98 and therefore invalid.2

(c) The fact that no reasons were given vitiates the finding.

After the full argument, learned Counsel for the Petitioner

abandoned the first ground. Hence there is no necessity to dwell

on it.

This leads me to consider the second ground.

2. Regulation 98: Opinion as to the Finding

Regulation 98 reads as follows:

The opinion of every member of the Court Martial as to the

finding shall be given by word of mouth on each charge

separately.

It is the argument of learned Counsel for the Petitioner that each

member of the Court Martial shall individually pronounce in

open Court whether he finds the accused guilty or not guilty on

each charge.

It is clear from the proceedings in question that only the

President of the Court Martial pronounced the finding in open

Court. On this basis, learned Counsel strenuously submits that

the finding shall be quashed, as it is a fatal irregularity.

2 Court Martial (General and District) Regulations, found in Subsidiary Legislation of Ceylon (1956), Vol.VI, Cap.359 (hereinafter Regulation or Regulations).

6

Learned Additional Solicitor General3 for the Respondents

admits other than the President none of the other members of the

Court Martial has pronounced the findings, but his submission

is that such procedural irregularity does not warrant quashing

the impugned decision in toto, as no prejudice has been caused

to the Petitioner thereby.4

It is my considered view that the submission of learned Counsel

for the Petitioner on Regulation 98 and the counter submission

of learned ASG on the same are on a wrong premise and

therefore ought to be rejected.

Regulation 97(1) states The court martial shall deliberate on its

finding in closed court. Regulation 98 states The opinion of

every member of the court martial as to the finding shall be given

by word of mouth on each charge separately. In my view, the

giving of opinion as to the finding is part of deliberations and

takes place in closed Court.

Let me explain.

Section 55(1) of the Air Force Act reads as follows:

Every member of a court martial and the Judge-Advocate, if

any, shall take the prescribed oath or make the prescribed

affirmation before the commencement of the trial of a case.

Section 61(9) of the Act reads as follows:

3 Hereinafter ASG. 4 Vide page 5 of the written submissions of the Respondent dated 27.01.2020.

7

Every question before a court martial shall be decided by

the majority vote of the members of the court martial. Where

there is an equality of votes of the members of a court

martial on the question of the finding in any case, the

accused in that case shall be deemed to be acquitted.

Where there is an equality of votes of the members of a

court martial on the sentence in any case or on any

question arising after the commencement of the hearing of

any case other than the question of the finding, the

president shall have a casting vote.

Regulation 29(1) states:

As soon as the court martial is constituted with the proper

number of members who are not objected to, or the

objections to whom have been overruled, an oath or

affirmation shall be administered to and taken in the

presence of the accused by each member of the court. Such

oath or affirmation shall be substantially in the form A

specified in the Second Schedule hereto.

The content of Form Athe oath taken by the President and

members of the Court Martialis relevant to understand the

issue.

I swear by Almighty God/sincerely and truly declare and

affirm that I shall well and truly try the accused (or accused

persons) before this Court Martial according to the evidence,

and that I shall duly administer justice according to the Air

Force Act and the regulations thereunder now in force,

without partiality, favour or affection, and I do also

8

swear/affirm that, except so far as may be permitted by

instructions of the Commander of the Air Force for the

purpose of communicating the sentence to the accused, I

shall not divulge the sentence of the Court until it is duly

confirmed, and I do further swear/affirm that I shall not on

any account, at any time whatsoever, disclose or discover

the vote or opinion of any particular member of this Court

Martial, unless required so to do by due course of law.

(emphasis added)

This means, before the commencement of the trial, every

member of the Court Martial takes an oath or makes an

affirmation that he shall not on any account, at any time

whatsoever, disclose or discover the vote or opinion of any

particular member of this Court Martial, unless required so to do

by due course of law. This, in my view, refers to the opinion as

to the finding in Regulation 98, which specifically mentions the

opinion of every member of the Court Martial, as distinct from

other Regulations which refer to the opinion of the Court Martial

in general. Regulation 98 then is intended to take place in

secrecy, in closed Court.

This is made clear by corresponding provisions in the Indian

Army Rules of 1954, which are similar in form and substance to

the Sri Lankan Regulations under consideration in the instant

case.

Rule 61 of the Indian Army Rules, which encapsulates

Regulations 97 and 98 of the Sri Lankan Regulations, explicitly

states that the opinion of each member as to the finding shall be

9

given in closed Court during the deliberations of the Court

Martial. It is noteworthy that this Rule is under the sub-heading

Consideration of finding. Rule 61 runs as follows:

61. Consideration of finding

(1) The court shall deliberate on its finding in closed

court in the presence of the judge-advocate.

(2) The opinion of each member of the court as to the

finding shall be given by word of mouth on each

charge separately.

The fact that the opinion of each member shall be given in

closed Court has been reiterated in Mukherjee v. Union of

India5a Judgment of the Supreme Court of India, heavily relied

on by learned ASGwhere it says Rule 61 prescribes that the

Court shall deliberate on its findings in closed court in the

presence of the judge-advocate and the opinion of each member of

the court as to the finding shall be given by word of mouth on

each charge separately.

However, learned ASG for the Respondents does not say such

opinion as to the finding was given by each member by word of

mouth even in closed Court. His simple argument is the word

opinion found in Regulation 98 has no special meaning and it

refers to the finding read in open Court by the President of the

Court Martial on behalf of all members of the Court Martial. If I

may use his own words, with regard to Rule 98 what is meant

by the word Opinion there is, whether the particular member of

5 1990 AIR 1984, 1990 SCR Sup (1) 44.

10

the Court Martial has found the Accused either guilty or not guilty

and nothing more than that.6 This argument is simply

unacceptable. Every word in a statute shall be given a meaning.7

This means, in the instant case, the opinion of each member of

the Court Martial as to the finding of guilt of the Petitioner for

murder has not been given. This, in my view, is fatal to the

conviction in view of Regulations 175 and 176, which are

couched in peremptory terms, with the use of the word must.

175. Every member of a Court Martial must give his

opinion by word of mouth on every matter which the

court has to decide, including sentence,

notwithstanding that he may have given his opinion

in favour of acquittal.

176. The opinion of the members of the courts martial shall

be taken in succession, beginning with the member

having the most junior rank.

According to Regulations 175 and 176, the giving of opinion as

to the finding by every member of the Court Martial by word of

mouth is mandatory, whether in open Court or closed Court.

But this mandatory requirement has not been complied with in

the instant case.

However, learned ASG, citing Seneviratne v. Urban Council,

Kegalle8 in support, states even if one were to contend that the

6 Page 5 of the written submission of the Respondents dated 13.03.2020. 7 Maxwell on The Interpretation of Statutes, 12th Edition by P. St. J. Langan (2004), p.36. 8 [2001] 3 Sri LR 105.

11

procedure followed by the Court Martial may be somewhat

irregular, such procedural irregularity is decisive only in

situations where material prejudice has been caused to the

relevant party.

In Seneviratnes case, one of the grounds relied upon by the

Petitioners in challenging the acquisition order was failure to

state the public purpose for which the land was to be acquired

in the Section 2 Notice issued under the Land Acquisition Act.9

Counsel for the Respondents convinced the Court with

documentary evidence that the Petitioners were aware of the

public purpose for which the land was to be acquired long before

the publication of the Section 2 Notice. It is in this context that

the Court cited De Smiths Judicial Review of Administrative

Action (5th Edition), where it states If the applicant has not been

prejudiced by the matters on which he relies then the Court may

refuse relief even though he has succeeded in establishing some

defect. The literal or technical breach of an apparently mandatory

provision in a Statute may be so insignificant as not in effect to

matter. In these circumstances the Court may in its discretion

refuse relief.

The issue in the instant case is not comparable. The instant

case deals with the liberty of a man, not with his proprietary

rights, as in Seneviratnes case. Regulation 98 deals with the

procedure relating to infliction of punishment, in fact, the most

serious known to lawcapital punishment or life imprisonment.

Maxwell emphasises:

9 No.9 of 1950, as amended.

12

Statutes dealing with jurisdiction and procedure are, if they

relate to the infliction of penalties, strictly construed:

compliance with procedural provisions will be stringently

exacted from those proceeding against the person liable to

be penalised, and if there is any ambiguity or doubt it will,

as usual, be resolved in his favour. This is so, even though

it may enable him to escape upon a technicality.10

I have no doubt the above is intensely relevant to the facts of

this case, whereas De Smiths quotation in Seneviratnes case is

not applicable here.

For the aforesaid reasons, I hold that the Petitioner is entitled to

succeed on the second ground.

I will now proceed to consider the third ground, although the

application of the Petitioner can be allowed on the second

ground itself.

3. Regulation 99: Reasons for the Finding

It is undisputed that no reasons were given by the General

Court Martial when it convicted the Petitioner for murder11 and

passed the sentence of rigorous imprisonment for life.12

10 Maxwell on The Interpretation of Statutes, 12th Edition by P. St. J. Langan (2004), p. 245. 11 Vide the proceedings dated 15.12.2010 at page 115 marked P1 with the petition. 12 Vide R6 tendered with the Respondents statement of objections. In addition to rigorous imprisonment for life, the Petitioner was discharged with ignominy from the Sri Lanka Air Force. The Petitioner is not challenging his discharge from the Air Force.

13

Learned Counsel for the Petitioner vehemently submits the

failure to give reasons vitiates the said decision.

The counter submission of learned ASG for the Respondents is

there is no necessity for the Court Martial to give reasons for its

decision.

The argument of learned ASG, as presented in the written

submission, is as follows:

S.99 of the Regulations reads thus;

99. The finding on every charge against the accused shall

be recorded and, except as mentioned in these regulations,

shall be recorded simply as a finding of Guilty, or of Not

guilty or of Not guilty and honourably acquit him of the

same.

It is respectfully submitted that the drafters of the

regulations have included the word simply in order to

stress the fact that all what is required of Court Martial is to

pronounce its verdict by using the words Guilty or Not

Guilty and therefore nothing further is required.

In this backdrop it would be pertinent to submit that there

is just one section of the Regulations which seems to require

Court Martial to give reasons for its recommendation. S.108

of the Regulations reads as follows;

108. If the Court Martial makes a recommendation of

mercy, it shall give its reasons for its recommendation.

14

Other than the aforesaid section nowhere else in the

Regulations it is stated that reasons should be given.13

Learned ASG develops his argument on three Indian authorities:

1. Som Datt Datta v. Union of India (SC) decided in 196814

2. Mukherjee v. Union of India (SC) decided in 199015

3. Syam Sunder v. General Court Martial (HC) decided in

199716

I regret my inability to agree with this argument.

Regulation 99 quoted above deals with the finding. The finding

is one thing. Reasons for the finding is another. The two are

not the same. There is no issue the finding can simply be

recorded as guilty or not guilty, as the Regulation stipulates.

The word simply, found in Regulation 99, does not, cannot and

shall not absolve the Court Martial from giving reasons for its

finding, especially when a man is convicted of murder and

condemned to death/life imprisonment. Is a man who is

convicted of murder and sentenced to death or life imprisonment

not entitled to know the reasons for such a decision, at the bare

minimum to decide whether he shall appeal against the

conviction and sentence? In my judgment, he isnot as a matter

of sound practice, but as of right. If a country is governed by

the rule of law, reasons for decisions must be given, no less

13 Page 8 of the written submissions dated 27.01.2020. 14 1969 AIR 414, 1969 SCR (2) 177. 15 1990 AIR 1984, 1990 SCR Sup (1) 44. 16 1997 (4) ALD 637.

15

when a man is convicted for murder and the death sentence, or

life imprisonment is passed as the punishment.

It is the submission of learned ASG that Regulation 108, which

explicitly requires the Court Martial to give reasons for a

recommendation of mercy, makes it clear that the necessity of

giving reasons for a conviction in terms of Regulation 99 has

been done away with by necessary implication.

This submission is based on the dicta in Mukherjees case

(supra), where the Supreme Court of India in relation to Rule

66(1) of the Army Rules (which is analogous to Regulation 108 of

our Regulations) stated as follows:

Rule 66(1) requires reasons to be recorded for its

recommendation in cases where the court makes a

recommendation to mercy. There is no such requirement in

other provisions relating to recording of findings and

sentence. Rule 66(1) proceeds on the basis that there is no

such requirement because if such a requirement was there

it would not have been necessary to have a specific

provision for recording of reasons for the recommendation to

mercy. The said provisions thus negative a requirement to

give reasons for its finding and sentence by the court-

martial and reasons are required to be recorded only in

cases where the court-martial makes a recommendation to

mercy. In our opinion, therefore, at the stage of recording of

findings and sentence the court-martial is not required to

record its reasons and at that stage reasons are only

16

required for the recommendation to mercy if the court-

martial makes such a recommendation.

With respect, I find myself unable to agree with this reasoning.

In my view, under Regulation 108 the Court Martial is explicitly

required to give reasons because there is no decision involved in

the situation contemplated therein. The decision is the

conviction and sentence, which has already taken place when

Regulation 108 is invoked. There is no compelling need or

requirement of natural justice or otherwise to give reasons for

recommendations. No direct consequences flow from

recommendations: they are neither enforceable nor binding, as

decisions are. Hence the requirement to give reasons in express

terms in Regulation 108.

In the result, I take the view that Regulation 108 does not

exclude by necessary implication the requirement of giving

reasons for a conviction and sentence.

In my view, it cannot be surmised that the requirement of giving

reasons has been dispensed with by implication. The giving of

reasons for decisions is inherent in the justice system of any

civilised society. It is embedded in it and inseparable from it. It

is a basic requirement of natural justice. Such a fundamental

requirement which goes to the root of the matter cannot be

taken away by conjecture.

Maxwell says In determining either the general object of the

legislature, or the meaning of its language in any particular

passage, it is obvious that the intention which appears to be most

17

in accord with convenience, reason, justice and legal principles

should, in all cases of doubtful significance, be presumed to be

the true one.17

I would go one step further to say that not only can it not be

assumed that a requirement to give reasons is excluded by

implication, even if that requirement is excluded in express

terms, such (purported) exclusions shall be subject to strict

interpretation in order to promote the essence of natural justice.

On parity of reasoning, statutory ouster clauses found in

statutes to declare that a decision shall be final and conclusive

for all intents and purposes, shall not be subject to appeal or

review in any court, shall be final and shall not be called in

question in any court etc. have been interpreted by the Courts

against the plain meaning of the words, and it has been

consistently held that such ouster clauses do not prevent the

Courts from intervening inter alia in the case of lack of or excess

of jurisdiction.18 Failure to comply with the rules of natural

justice is an incidence of acting in excess of jurisdiction.

In the words of Wade:

Statutory restrictions on judicial remedies are given the

narrowest possible construction, sometimes even against

the plain meaning of the words. This is a sound policy,

since otherwise administrative authorities and tribunals

17 Maxwell on The Interpretation of Statutes, 12th Edition by P. St. J. Langan (2004), p.199. 18 Vide Ladamuttu Pillai v. Attorney-General (1957) 59 NLR 313; Abeywickrema v. Pathirana [1986] 1 Sri LR 120 at 156; Gunasekera v. De Mel, Commissioner of Labour (1978) 79(2) NLR 409 at 426; Withanarachchi v. Gunawardena [1996] 1 Sri LR 253; Attorney-General v. Ryan [1980] AC 718.

18

would be given uncontrollable power and could violate the

law at will. Finality is a good thing but justice is better.19

For instance, section 8(2) of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal

Act, No.4 of 2002, reads as follows: A decision made by the

Tribunal shall be final and conclusive and shall not be called in

question in any suit or proceedings in a court of law. After

tracing the legal history in that regard, this Court in Mankotte v.

Chairman, Administrative Appeals Tribunal20 held section 8(2) of

the Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act does not operate as a

blanket prohibition on the Court of Appeal to exercise writ

jurisdiction over the decisions of the Administrative Appeals

Tribunal.

Natural justice is the essence of the law. It is eternal law which

cannot be overridden by man-made law. At many points in legal

history, when the law has been in crisis, it is to natural law that

men have turned for inspiration.21

If the rules of natural justice have not been observed in enacting

legislation, our Courts have stepped forward to remedy it,

despite the intention of the legislature being crystal clear. The

Judgment of Sharvananda C.J. in Manawadu v. Attorney-

General22 provides a classic example. Section 40 of the Forest

Ordinance23 was amended by Act No. 13 of 1982 in order to put

19 H.W.R. Wade & C.F. Forsyth, Administrative Law, 11th Edition, p.609. 20 CA/WRIT/249/2015, CA Minutes of 06.03.2019; Vide also Waruna Sameera v. Chairman, Administrative Appeals Tribunal, CA/WRIT/73/2016, CA Minutes of 20.02.2019. 21 C.G. Weeramantry, The Law in Crisis: Bridges of Understanding, (1975), p.185. 22 [1987] 2 Sri LR 30. 23 No.16 of 1907.

19

in effect the forfeiture of a vehicle used to transport timber, on

the strength of the conviction of any person using the vehicle for

a forest offence, without giving a hearing to the owner of the

vehicle. There was no scintilla of doubt that the said

amendment was brought in deliberately, as a stringent measure

to stop the illicit felling of trees. But Sharvananda C.J. was not

inclined to give effect to the intention of the legislature on the

face of blatant violation of basic principles of natural justice:

State Counsel relevantly pointed that section 7 of the

Amending Act 13 of 1982 repealed amended section 40 of

the Forest Ordinance and substituted a new section in

terms of which Upon the conviction of any person for a

forest offence...the motor vehicle used in committing such

offence (whether such motor vehicles are owned by such

person or not), shall by reason of such conviction be

forfeited to the State. He submitted that the forfeiture of

the vehicle is automatic on the conviction of the offender

irrespective of the fact that the owner of the vehicle is

innocent and the owner is no party to the commission of the

offence. He referred to the espousal of the object that the

Minister had in mind when introducing the Bill for effecting

the Amendment No. 13 of 1982. Vide Hansard dated

25.2.1982, Vol. 9 Part 19 at pages 1558-1559 the Minister

said:- It is necessary in the situation that we are faced,

where forest resources are fast depleting to see that strong

and firm action is taken although in the process some

innocent people might suffer. I see the force of Counsels

argument. However a construction which offends justice

and is repugnant to the Rule of Law that permeates our

20

Constitution should yield to an alternate construction which

is harmony with justice and human rights. It is too much to

believe that Parliament intended by this amendment to

jettison the in-built principles of natural justice highlighted

in the judgments of our courts and of courts of other

civilised countries. The Constitution assures justice to all

people. Arbitrary forfeiture without reference to the owners

culpability is the negation of justice. The courts assume that

the legislature does not intend injustice and seek to avoid a

construction that produces or spells injustice.24 (emphasis

added)

Accordingly, by majority decision, it was held that the amended

section 40 does not exclude by necessary implication the audi

alteram partem rule of natural justice, and therefore the word

forfeited found in the amended section shall be taken to mean

liable to be forfeited, and the owner of the vehicle shall be

heard before a decision on forfeiture is taken.

After an analysis of the natural justice perspective of giving

reasons for decisions, the Supreme Court of India in Mukherjees

case (supra)the main case relied upon by learned ASG to say

that the Court Martial need not give reasons for its

decisionremarked as follows:

Reasons, when recorded by an administrative authority in

an order passed by it while exercising quasi-judicial

functions, would no doubt facilitate the exercise of its

jurisdiction by the appellate or supervisory authority. But

24 At pages 40-41.

21

the other considerations, referred to above, which have also

weighed with this Court in holding that an administrative

authority must record reasons for its decision, are of no less

significance. These considerations show that the recording

of reasons by an administrative authority serves a salutary

purpose, namely, it excludes chances of arbitrariness and

ensures a degree of fairness in the process of decision-

making. The said purpose would apply equally to all

decisions and its application cannot be confined to

decisions which are subject to appeal, revision or judicial

review. In our opinion, therefore, the requirement that

reasons be recorded should govern the decisions of an

administrative authority exercising quasi-judicial functions

irrespective of the fact whether the decision is subject to

appeal, revision or judicial review. It may, however, be

added that it is not required that the reasons should be as

elaborate as in the decision of a Court of law. The extent

and nature of the reasons would depend on particular facts

and circumstances. What is necessary is that the reasons

are clear and explicit so as to indicate that the authority

has given due consideration to the points in controversy.

The need for recording of reasons is greater in a case where

the order is passed at the original stage. The appellate or

revisional authority, if it affirms such an order, need not

give separate reasons if the appellate or revisional authority

agrees with the reasons contained in the order under

challenge.

The object underlying the rules of natural justice is to

prevent miscarriage of justice and secure fair play in

22

action. As pointed out earlier the requirement about

recording of reasons for its decision by an administrative

authority exercising quasi-judicial functions achieves this

object by excluding chances of arbitrariness and ensuring a

degree of fairness in the process of decision-making.

Keeping in view the expanding horizon of the principles of

natural justice, we are of the opinion, that the requirement

to record reason can be regarded as one of the principles of

natural justice which govern exercise of power by

administrative authorities. The rules of natural justice are

not embodied rules. The extent of their application depends

upon the particular statutory framework whereunder

jurisdiction has been conferred on the administrative

authority. With regard to the exercise of a particular power

by an administrative authority including exercise of judicial

or quasi-judicial functions the legislature, while conferring

the said power, may feel that it would not be in the larger

public interest that the reasons for the order passed by the

administrative authority be recorded in the order and be

communicated to the aggrieved party and it may dispense

with such a requirement. It may do so by making an

express provision to that affect as those contained in the

Administrative Procedure Act, 1946 of U.S.A. and the

Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act, 1977 of

Australia whereby the orders passed by certain specified

authorities are excluded from the ambit of the enactment.

Such an exclusion can also arise by necessary implication

from the nature of the subject matter, the scheme and the

provisions of the enactment. The public interest underlying

23

such a provision would outweigh the salutary purpose

served by the requirement to record the reasons. The said

requirement cannot, therefore, be insisted upon in such a

case.

For the reasons aforesaid, it must be concluded that except

in cases where the requirement has been dispensed with

expressly or by necessary implication, an administrative

authority exercising judicial or quasi-judicial functions is

required to record the reasons for its decision. (emphasis

added)

Then it is clear, according to the Judgments relied upon by

learned ASG himself, the giving of reasons for a decision of the

Court Martial is an indispensable requirement for the validity of

the decision, unless the requirement has been dispensed with

expressly or by necessary implication.

In my judgment, giving reasons for a decision of the Court

Martial has not been dispensed with expressly or by necessary

implication in the Air Force Act or Regulations made thereunder.

Hence, failure to give reasons is fatal to the conviction of murder

in the instant case.

4. Applicability of Indian Decisions

Let me further consider the applicability of the three Indian

decisions learned ASG relies on to buttress his argument. For

convenience if I may repeat, these are Som Datt Datta v. Union of

24

India (SC) decided in 1968,25 Mukherjee v. Union of India (SC)

decided in 1990,26 and Syam Sunder v. General Court Martial

(HC) decided in 1997.27

In the first place, I must state that these authorities are not

binding on this Court.

In any event, the said decisions are distinguishable and

therefore inapplicable in deciding the matter at hand.

In the first case, Som Datt Datta (supra), the final argument of

Counsel for the Petitioner was:

[T]he order of the Chief of the Army Staff confirming the

proceedings of the Court-Martial under s.164 of the Army

Act was illegal since no reason has been given in support of

the order by the Chief of the Army Staff. It was also pointed

out that the Central Government has also not given any

reasons while dismissing the appeal of the Petitioner under

s.165 of the Army Act and that the order of the Central

Government must therefore be held to be illegal and ultra

vires and quashed by the grant of a writ in the nature of

certiorari.

This argument was rejected by the Supreme Court of India,

stating as follows:

In the present case it is manifest that there is no express

obligation imposed by s.164 or by s.165 of the Army Act on

25 1969 AIR 414, 1969 SCR (2) 177. 26 1990 AIR 1984, 1990 SCR Sup (1) 44. 27 1997 (4) ALD 637.

25

the confirming authority or upon the Central Government to

give reasons in support of its decision to confirm the

proceedings of the Court Martial. Mr. Dutta has been unable

to point out any other section of the Act or any of the rule

made therein from which necessary implication can be

drawn that such a duty is cast upon the Central

Government or upon the confirming authority. Apart from

any requirement imposed by the statute or statutory rule

either expressly or by necessary implication, we are unable

to accept the contention of Mr. Dutta that there is any

general principle or any rule of natural justice that a

statutory tribunal should always and in every case give

reasons in support of its decision.

This decision can be distinguished from the instant case on

three grounds:

Firstly, the question to be decided by the Supreme Court of India

was not whether the Court Martial shall give reasons for its

decision but whether the confirming authority and the Central

Government ought to have given reasons in dismissing the

appeal.

In the instant case before me, the question is whether the Court

Martial, which found the Petitioner guilty of murder and passed

life imprisonment as the punishment, should have given

reasons.

Secondly, the basis upon which the Supreme Court of India

rejected the argument of the Petitioner in the said case was

Apart from any requirement imposed by the statute or statutory

26

rule either expressly or by necessary implication, we are unable to

accept the contention...that there is any general principle or any

rule of natural justice that a statutory tribunal should always and

in every case give reasons in support of its decision.

As I have already stated (and will go on to elaborate further

under the sub-heading Natural Justice and Giving Reasons)

the absence of an express statutory provision compelling

reasons does not absolve a deciding authority from giving

reasons for its decision. Natural justice demands reasons shall

be given for a decision.

Thirdly, in the said case, the Supreme Court of India stated it is

unable to accept there is any general principle or any rule of

natural justice that a statutory tribunal should always and in

every case give reasons in support of its decision.

The Supreme Court of India has regarded the Court Martial as a

statutory tribunal, but in the landmark Judgment of J.A.N. De

Silva C.J. in Sarath Fonseka v. Dhammika Kithulegoda,28 the

Supreme Court of Sri Lanka, having analysed the law including

Constitutional provisions in great detail, held that the Court

Martial is not only a Court but a competent Court, which can

impose a sentence of death or imprisonment.

In Mukherjees case (supra) the Supreme Court of India followed

the decision of the Som Datt Datta case referred to above. In

Mukherjees case the two questions of law which the Court was

invited to consider were:

28 [2011] BLR 169.

27

(i) Is there any general principle of law which requires

an administrative authority to record the reasons for

its decision; and

(ii) If so, does the said principle apply to an order

confirming the findings and sentence of Court Martial

and post confirmation proceedings under the Act?

These are the same questions considered in Som Datt Dattas

case.

In Mukherjees case, Counsel for the Petitioner invited the

Supreme Court of India to reconsider the decision in Som Datt

Dattas case, on the basis that the Supreme Court in Som Datt

Dattas case had not considered decisions such as Bhagat Raja

v. The Union of India and Others;29 Mahabir Prasad Santosh

Kumar v. State of U.P. and Others;30 Woolcombers of India Ltd. v.

Woolcombers Workers Union and Another;31 and Siemens

Engineering & Manufacturing Co. of India Limited v. Union of

India and Another,32 which took the view that reasons shall be

given for decisions. However, in Mukherjees case, the Supreme

Court did not depart from the decision in Som Datt Dattas case.

The Court concluded Since we have arrived at the same

conclusion as in Som Datt Datta case (supra) the submission of

Shri Ganguli that the said decision needs reconsideration cannot

be accepted and is therefore, rejected.

29 [1967] 3 SCR 302. 30 [1971] 1 SCR 201. 31 [1974] 1 SCR 503. 32 [1976] Suppl. SCR 489.

28

After discussing the principles of law enunciated in various

Judgments, the Supreme Court of India came to the following

conclusion in Mukherjees case.

For the reasons aforesaid, it must be concluded that except

in cases where the requirement has been dispensed with

expressly or by necessary implication, an administrative

authority exercising judicial or quasi-judicial functions is

required to record the reasons for its decision.

This is different from the conclusion of the same Court in Som

Datt Dattas case, where the conclusion was, if I may repeat:

Apart from any requirement imposed by the statute or

statutory rule either expressly or by necessary implication,

we are unable to accept the contention...that there is any

general principle or any rule of natural justice that a

statutory tribunal should always and in every case give

reasons in support of its decision.

If I may explain, the position of the Supreme Court of India in

Som Datt Dattas case decided in 1968 was there is no general

principle or rule of natural justice that a statutory tribunal

should always and in every case give reasons in support of its

decisions; but the position of the same Court in Mukherjees

case decided in 1990 was there is a general principle or rule of

natural justice that a statutory tribunal should always and in

every case give reasons in support of its decisions, except in

cases where the requirement has been dispensed with expressly

or by necessary implication.

29

This means, the Supreme Court of India has shifted its stance

and now strongly favours the view that giving reasons for a

decision is the norm and withholding reasons is the exception.

In Mukherjees case, the Supreme Court of India recognised

Keeping in view the expanding horizon of the principles of

natural justice, we are of the opinion, that the requirement to

record reason can be regarded as one of the principles of natural

justice which govern exercise of power by administrative

authorities.

On the reasons set out by me with regard to Som Datt Dattas

case, I am not persuaded by the decision in Mukherjees case to

accept the argument of learned ASG in the instant case.

In Syam Sunder (supra), the High Court of India followed the

Judgment of the Supreme Court in Mukherjees case and stated

as follows:

Their Lordships in S. N. Mukherjee's case, in para No. 48 of

the judgment, observed as under:-

For the reasons aforesaid it must be held that reasons

are not required to be recorded for an order passed by the

confirming authority confirming the finding and sentence

recorded by the court-martial as well as for the order

passed by the Central Government dismissing the post-

confirmation petition. Since we have arrived at the same

conclusion as in Som Datta case, the submission of Shri

Ganguli that the said decision needs reconsideration cannot

be accepted and is, therefore, rejected

30

Therefore, in the light of the foregoing discussion, we are

unable to accede to the contention of the Petitioner that the

orders of the court-martial which has been confirmed by the

Army Chief and the Central Government are bad in law, as

no reasons are assigned for its findings.

It is significant that the Judgment of the Supreme Court of India

in Mukherjees case has not been consistently followed in later

Indian decisions. One such case is Maj. Dimple Singla v. Union

of India (Uoi)33 decided in 2008.

In Maj. Dimple Singlas case, the Petitioner took up a preliminary

objection before the General Court Martial as to jurisdiction.

The objection was overruled without reasons. The Petitioner

challenged the said order in a writ application on the ground

that it was not a reasoned order and therefore violated the

principles of natural justice. The Respondents took up the

position that it is not a requirement under Rule 51 of the Army

Rules of India to give reasons when the Court overrules such an

objection. Under Rule 51(2), If the court overrules the special

plea, it shall proceed with the trial. Under Rule 51(3), If the

court allows the special plea, it shall record its decision, and the

reasons for it. The Respondents relied on the Supreme Court

Judgments in Mukherjees case and Som Datt Dattas case.

Having analysed the law, the High Court of India set aside the

impugned order of the Court Martial. The High Court quoted

the relevant portions of the Judgment in Mukherjees case and

stated inter alia as follows:

33 2008 (2) SCT 183 (P&H).

31

But that is not the end of the matter because even though

there is no requirement to record reasons by the confirming

authority while passing the order confirming the findings

and sentence of the Court Martial or by the Central

Government while passing its order on the post-

confirmation petition, it is open to the person aggrieved by

such an order to challenge the validity of the same before

this Court under Article 32 of the Constitution or before the

High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution and he can

obtain appropriate relief in those proceedings.

In the above case, the High Court of India concluded that the

giving of reasons for a decision of the Court Martial will make

the right of appeal of the Petitioner a meaningful right, which

alone would satisfy the principles of natural justice, equity and

fair play. Accordingly, the impugned order was quashed.

The argument of learned ASG in the instant case, based on the

Indian decisions discussed in this section that there is no

statutory requirement to adduce reasons for the finding of the

Court Martial and therefore no necessity to give reasons, is

rejected.

The Petitioner is entitled to relief on the third ground as well.

5. Court Martial Decision not Final

There is no finality attached to the finding or decision of the

Court Martial. There are a number of remedies available against

32

the decision of a Court Martial, as seen from the provisions of

the Air Force Act and the Regulations made thereunder.

Section 63 of the Act stipulates that the conviction and sentence

of a Court Martial shall not be valid until confirmed by an

authority with power to approve such convictions and sentences.

In certain instances, the approval of the Confirming Authority

and the President is required. The Confirming Authority may,

according to section 65 of the Act, refer the conviction and/or

sentence to the Court Martial for revision, refer the matter to a

superior authority for confirmation, or alter the conviction

and/or punishment imposed.

These sections are further elaborated in Regulations 131-154.

Regulation 140 also allows any officer or airman who considers

himself aggrieved by the finding or sentence of a Court Martial

may forward a petition to the confirming authority through his

commanding officer.

In addition to the above provisions, section 67 of the Air Force

Act empowers the President or any prescribed officer to revise

the sentence even after it has been confirmed. This has been

highlighted by the Respondents themselves in their written

submission:34

The President or any prescribed officer may, in accordance

with such regulations as may be made in that behalf, revise

any sentence passed on an accused by a Court Martial and

confirmed by an authority having the power to confirm it,

and in revising the sentence may

34 Vide page 7 of the written submissions dated 03.09.2019.

33

a) mitigate the punishment to a less amount of the same

punishment;

b) remit the whole or a part of the punishment; and

c) commute the punishment to a different form of

punishment lower in the scale of punishments

authorized by this Act.

Section 68 deals with the powers of a superior air force

authority to revisit the sentence.

The jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal to issue writs in respect

of matters before Courts Martial is expressly retained by section

79 of the Act.

79(1) Such of the provisions of Article 140 of the

Constitution as relate to the grant and issue of writs of

mandamus, certiorari, and prohibition shall be deemed to

apply in respect of any Court Martial or of any air-force

authority exercising judicial functions.

(2) The provisions of Article 141 of the Constitution relating

to the issue of writs of habeas corpus shall be deemed to

apply in respect of any person illegally detained in custody

by order of a Court Martial or other air-force authority.

In Sarath Fonseka v. Dhammika Kithulegoda,35 the Supreme

Court recognised the power of a Court having competent

jurisdiction to set aside the decision of a Court Martial, stating

a sentence of death or imprisonment handed down by a Court

35 [2011] BLR 169 at 177.

34

Martial is valid until and unless overturned by a Court of

competent jurisdiction.

In Mahabir Prasad Santosh Kumar v. State of U.P.36 the Supreme

Court of India stated:

Recording of reasons in support of a decision on a disputed

claim by a quasi-judicial authority ensures that the decision

is reached according to law and is not the result of caprice,

whim or fancy or reached on grounds of policy or

expediency. A party to the dispute is ordinarily entitled to

know the grounds on which the authority has rejected his

claim. If the order is subject to appeal, the necessity to

record reasons is greater, for without recorded reasons the

appellate authority has no material on which it may

determine whether the facts were properly ascertained, the

relevant law was correctly applied and the decision was

just.

The above discussion speaks volumes about the necessity to

adduce reasons for a decision of the Court Martial. The

Confirming Authority cannot be a mere rubber stamp. If the

decision is hollow, how can the Confirming Authority or

President or any competent Court revise the decision?

6. Natural Justice and Giving Reasons

Public law remedies such as writs of certiorari and mandamus

are largely, if not solely, based on principles of natural justice.

36 1971 SCR (1) 201.

35

The first principle of natural justice is to hear both sides before

taking a decision. This is known as the audi alteram partem

rule, which runs across-the-board on the whole spectrum of the

decision-making process as a golden thread, irrespective of

whether the decision is by a regular Court, quasi-judicial body,

administrative tribunal or the like. Hearing both sides does not

end the matter. After the hearing, the deciding authority shall

give its decision. The decision shall not be an empty decision

without reasons. De Smith says If those entitled to be heard

have no right to know how a tribunal resolved the issues in

dispute at the hearing, they may well regard as an empty ritual

their legally conferred opportunity to be heard.37 The aggrieved

party has a right to know the reasons for the decision, at least to

consider challenging the decision by appeal or judicial review. If

the decision is challenged before another forum, such forum

shall know the basis of the impugned decision to ascertain its

correctness or otherwise.

A reasoned decision is necessary to enable the person

prejudicially affected by the decision to know whether he

has a ground of appeal, or alternatively, a ground of

challenge by way of judicial review. Reasons will also

assist the appellate or reviewing court to scrutinise

effectively the decision for relevant error, without

necessarily usurping the function of the decision-maker by

itself re-determining the question of fact and discretion

37 De Smiths Judicial Review, 8th Edition, p. 444.

36

which Parliament entrusted to the decision-maker. Without

reasons, it can be extremely difficult to detect errors.38

When the original decision is empty, what can an appellate or

reviewing body do other than declaring there is no decision to

appeal from or review in the eyes of the law, and therefore the

purported decision is a nullity, unless, at least, the reasons for

the said decision, which may have been originally withheld for

some reason, are later submitted. In such an event, it is not

necessary to prove that the failure to provide reasons

established some other ground of review, such as irrationality or

irrelevancy.

Making an order without giving reasons is a negation of the rule

of law.

The Supreme Court of India in Woolcombers of India Ltd. v.

Woolcombers Workers Union39 stated:

The giving of reasons in support of their conclusions by

judicial and quasi-judicial authorities when exercising

initial jurisdiction is essential for various reasons. First, it is

calculated to prevent unconscious unfairness or

arbitrariness in reaching the conclusions. The very search

for reasons will put the authority on the alert and minimise

the chances of unconscious infiltration of personal bias or

unfairness in the conclusion. The authority will adduce

reasons which will be regarded as fair and legitimate by a

reasonable man and will discard irrelevant or extraneous

38 De Smiths Judicial Review, 8th Edition, p. 443. 39 [1974] 1 SCR 504.

37

considerations. Second, it is a well-known principle that

justice should not only be done but should also appear to

be done. Unreasoned conclusions may be just but they may

not appear to be just to those who read them. Reasoned

conclusions on the other hand, will have also the

appearance of justice. Third, it should be remembered that

an appeal generally lies from the decisions of judicial and

quasi-judicial authorities to this Court by special leave

granted under Article 136. A judgment which does not

disclose the reasons, will be of little assistance to the Court.

Although there was a tendency to lean towards the view that

[n]either the Common Law nor principles of natural justice require

as a general rule that administrative tribunals or authorities

should give reasons for their decisions that are subject to judicial

review,40 the general trend in modern administrative law is an

increasing acceptance of the importance of giving reasons for

decisions and a rejection of the traditional view. In Amaradasa

v. Land Reform Commission41 it was stated There is no general

rule that reasons should be given for decisions by an

administrative body, but postulates of natural justice may

warrant a departure. It is apt to mention The historical origins

of the rule that there is no general duty to provide reasons are

obscure.42

40 Yaseen Omar v. Pakistan International Airlines Corporation [1999] 2 Sri LR 375 (SC); vide also Kusumawathie v. Aitken Spence Co. Ltd. [1996] 2 Sri LR 18; Sportsman Tea (Pvt) Ltd. v. Commissioner General of Labour [2006] 1 Sri LR 93; and the cases cited at 6-8 in Hapuarachchi v. Commissioner of Elections [2009] 1 Sri LR 1. 41 (1977) 79(1) NLR 505 at 541. 42 P.P. Craig, Administrative Law, 4th Edition, p. 131.

38

Wade vigorously supports the emerging trend of reasons for

decisions being an essential element of administrative justice

and a requirement for a general sense of justice.

The principles of natural justice do not, as yet, include any

general rule that reasons should be given for decisions.

Nevertheless there is a strong case to be made for the

giving of reasons as an essential element of administrative

justice. The need for it has been sharply exposed by the

expanding law of judicial review, now that so many

decisions are liable to be quashed or appealed against on

grounds of improper purpose, relevant consideration and

errors of law of various kinds. Unless the citizen can

discover the reasoning behind the decision, he may be

unable to tell whether it is reviewable or not, and so he may

be deprived of the protection of the law. A right to reasons

is therefore an indispensable part of a sound system of

judicial review. Natural justice may provide the best rubric

for it, since the giving of reasons is required by the ordinary

mans sense of justice. It is also a healthy discipline for all

who exercise power over others.43

Whilst acknowledging it has long been a commonly recited

proposition of English law that there is no general rule to give

reasons for administrative decisions, De Smith admits this

situation has changed enormously.44 He laments The absence

of a general duty to give reasons has long been condemned as a

major defect of our system of administrative law. As the Justice-

43 H.W.R. Wade and C.F. Forsyth, Administrative Law, 11th Edition, pp. 440-441. 44 De Smiths Judicial Review, 8th Edition, p. 439.

39

All Souls Committee concluded, no single factor has inhibited the

development of English administrative law as seriously as the

absence of any general obligation upon public authorities to give

reasons for their decisions.45 He says fairness or procedural

fairness usually will require a decision-maker to give reasons for

its decision. Overall, the trend of the law has been towards an

increased recognition of the duty to give reasons and there has

been a strong momentum in favour of greater openness and

transparency in decision-making.46 De Smith disapproves of the

failure to give reasons in strong terms:

A failure by a public authority to give reasons, or adequate

reasons, for a decision may be unlawful in two ways. First,

it may be said that such a failure is procedurally unfair.

Secondly, a failure to give adequate reasons may indicate

that a decision is irrational.47

To my mind, the notion that there is no principle of natural

justice that a tribunal or administrative authority should give

reasons for its decision is inherently incoherent. The essence of

natural justice demands administrative authorities give reasons

for decisions.48

What is Natural Justice? In its broadest sense natural justice

may mean simply the natural sense of what is right and wrong

45 Ibid., p. 442. 46 Ibid., pp. 441-442. 47 Ibid., p. 439. 48 Shell Gas Lanka Ltd. v. Consumer Affairs Authority [2005] 3 Sri LR 262; Kegalle Plantations Ltd. v. Silva [1996] 2 Sri LR 180.

40

and even in its technical sense it is now often equated with

fairness.49

Lord Denning in Breen v. Amalgamated Engineering Union50

opined The giving of reasons is one of the fundamentals of good

administration. The provision of reasons, Craig states,

increase public confidence in the administrative process and

enhance its legitimacy.51 De Smith adds, the giving of reasons:

encourages a careful examination of the relevant issues, the

elimination of extraneous considerations, and consistency

in decision-makingBasic fairness and respect for the

individual often requires that those in authority over others

should tell them why they are subject to some liability or

have been refused some benefit: in short, justice will not

be done if it is not apparent to the parties why one has won

and the other has lost.52 The giving of reasons increases

public confidence in the decision-making process.53

Whilst approving the recent trend of requiring reasons for

decisions as an important protection of the law, Mark Fernando

J. in Karunadasa v. Unique Gems Stones Ltd54 observed:

There is an even more compelling reason for Administrative

Law in Sri Lanka taking a similar strideArticle 12(1) of

the Constitution now guarantees the equal protection of the

law. In the context of the machinery for appeals, revision,

49 H.W.R. Wade and C.F. Forsyth, Administrative Law, 11th Edition, p.374. 50 [1971] 2 QB 175; (1971) 1 All ER 1148. 51 P.P. Craig, Administrative Law, 4th Edition, p. 430. 52 English v. Emery Reimbold & Strick Ltd. [2002] 1 WLR 2409 at [16]. 53 De Smiths Judicial Review, 8th Edition, pp.442-443. 54 [1997] 1 Sri LR 256.

41

judicial review, and the enforcement of fundamental rights,

giving reasons is becoming, increasingly, an important

protection of the law (see, for instance, Bandara v.

Premachadra (1994) 1 Sri LR 301) for if a party is not told

the reasons for an adverse decision his ability to seek

review will be impaired (cf. Wade, 541-542)

Article 12(1) of our Constitution recognises the equal protection

of the law as a fundamental right. This means, empty decisions

devoid of reasons not only give rise to invoking the writ

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal, but also the fundamental

rights jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.

This was considered in the case of Hapuarachchi v.

Commissioner General of Elections,55 where the Commissioner

General of Elections refused to register the Petitioners newly

formed political party as a recognised partyas the

Commissioner was statutorily empowered to dobut without

giving reasons. The Petitioners went before the Supreme Court

complaining that their fundamental right guaranteed by Article

12(1) to equal protection of the law had been violated thereby.

Bandaranayake J. (later C.J.) at page 16 held:

The Petitioners had complained of the infringement of their

fundamental right guaranteed in terms of Article 12(1) of

the Constitution. Article 12(1) of the Constitution deals with

the right to equality and reads as follows:

55 [2009] 1 Sri LR 1.

42

All persons are equal before the law and are entitled to the

equal protection of the law.

Equality, which could be introduced as a dynamic concept,

forbids inequalities, arbitrariness and, unfair decisions. As

pointed out by Bhagwati, J. (as he then was) in E. P.

Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu AIR (1974) SL 555

From a positivistic point of view, equality is antithetic to

arbitrariness. In fact equality and arbitrariness are sworn

enemies, one belongs to the rule of law in a Republic while

the other, to the whim and caprice of an absolute monarch.

In such circumstances to deprive a person of knowing the

reasons for a decision, which affects him would not only be

arbitrary, but also a violation of his right to equal protection

of the law.

In Siemens Engineering & Manufacturing Co. of India Limited v.

Union of India & Another,56 the Supreme Court of India

highlighted the giving of reasons for a decision as a basic

principle of natural justice.

The rule requiring reasons to be given in support of an order

is, like the principle of audi alteram partem, a basic

principle of natural justice which must inform every quasi-

judicial process and this rule must be observed in its proper

spirit and mere pretence of compliance with it would not

satisfy the requirement of law.

56 1976 AIR 1785, 1976 SCR 489.

43

Quoting the above with approval, the Supreme Court of India

observed in Mukherjee v. Union of India:57

This decision proceeds on the basis that the two well-

known principles of natural justice, namely (i) that no man

should be a Judge in his own cause and (ii) that no person

should be judged without a hearing, are not exhaustive and

that in addition to these two principles there may be rules

which seek to ensure fairness in the process of decision-

making and can be regarded as part of the principles of

natural justice. This view is in consonance with the law laid

down by this Court in A.K. Kraipak and Others v. Union of

India and Others [1970] 1 SCR 457 wherein it has been

held:

The concept of natural justice has undergone a great deal

of change in recent years. In the past it was thought that it

included just two rules namely (i) no one shall be a Judge in

his own cause (nemo debet esse judex propria causa) and

(ii) no decision shall be given against a party without

affording him a reasonable hearing (audi alteram partem).

Very soon thereafter a third rule was envisaged and that is

that quasi-judicial enquiries must be held in good faith,

without bias and not arbitrarily or unreasonably. But in the

course of years many more subsidiary rules came to be

added to the rules of natural justice.

If natural justice does not require giving reasons for decisions,

fairness, at least, does. Explaining the relationship between

57 1990 AIR 1984, 1990 SCR Sup (1) 44.

44

reasons and fair treatment, Galligan states giving reasons for

decisions is a means of determining whether power has been

exercised properly and whether parties have been treated fairly:

the underlying principle of fair treatment is that a party be

treated according to authoritative standards, and the giving of

reasons is a means to that end.58

Wade says it is increasingly clear that there are many

circumstances in which an administrative authority which fails to

give reasons will be found to have acted unlawfully59 and it is

always possible that the failure to give reasons for a decision may

justify the inference that the decision was not taken for a good

reason.60

In R v. Secretary for Trade and Industry ex parte Lonrho Plc,61

Lord Keith stated if all other known facts and circumstances

appear to point overwhelmingly in favour of a different decision,

the decision-maker, who has given no reasons, cannot complain if

the court draws the inference that he had no rational reason for

his decision.

The observation of Lord Upjohn in Padfield v. Minister of

Agriculture62 is relevant:

if [the decision-maker] does not give any reason for his

decision it may be, if circumstances warrant it, that a court

may be at liberty to come to the conclusion that he had no

58 D.J. Galligan, Due Process and Fair Procedures: A Study of Administrative Procedures, (1996), p.432. 59 H.W.R. Wade and C.F. Forsyth, Administrative Law, 11th Edition, p.441. 60 Ibid., p.442. 61 [1989] 1 WLR 525 at 540. 62 [1968] 1 All ER 694 at 719

45

good reason for reaching that conclusion and directing a

prerogative order to issue accordingly.

Failure to give reasons is a denial of justice.

In Lankem Tea and Rubber Plantations (Pvt) Ltd v. Central Bank

of Sri Lanka,63 Sripavan J. (later C.J.) held:

In the absence of reasons [by the Controller of Exchange], it

is impossible to determine whether or not there has been an

error of law. Failure to give reasons therefore amounts to a

denial of justice and is itself an error of law.

In R v Mental Health Review Tribunal-ex parte Clatworthy

(1985) 3 All ER 699 it was held that reasons should be

sufficiently detailed as to make quite clear to the parties

and specially the losing party as to why the tribunal

decided as it did and to avoid the impression that the

decision was based upon extraneous consideration rather

than the matter raised at the hearing.64

Failure to give reasons suggests arbitrariness.

Bandaranayake J. (later C.J.) in the Supreme Court case of

Choolanie v. Peoples Bank65 observed:

On a consideration of our case law in the light of the

attitude taken by Courts in other countries, it is quite clear

that giving reasons to an administrative decision is an

63 [2004] 2 Sri LR 133. 64 Vide also the Judgment of Sripavan J. (later C.J.) in Benedict v. Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka [2003] 3 Sri LR 68. 65 [2008] 2 Sri LR 93 at 105-106.

46

important feature in todays context, which cannot be lightly

disregarded. Furthermore, in a situation, where giving

reasons have been ignored, such a body would run the risk

of having acted arbitrarily in coming to their conclusion.

Giving reasons for decisions minimises abuse of power.

On behalf of the Supreme Court of India, in Madhya Pradesh

Industries Ltd. v. Union of India,66 Subba Rao J. stated:

In the context of a welfare State, administrative tribunals

have come to stay. Indeed, they are the necessary

concomitants of a welfare State. But arbitrariness in their

functioning destroys the concept of a welfare State itself.

Self-discipline and supervision exclude or at any rate

minimize arbitrariness. The least a tribunal can do is to

disclose its mind. The compulsion of disclosure guarantees

consideration. The condition to give reasons introduces

clarity and excludes or at any rate minimises arbitrariness;

it gives satisfaction to the party against whom the order is

made; and it also enables an appellate or supervisory court

to keep the tribunals within bounds. A reasoned order is a

desirable condition of judicial disposalIf tribunals can

make orders without giving reasons, the said power in the

hands of unscrupulous or dishonest officers may turn out to

be a potent weapon for abuse of power. But, if reasons for

an order are given, it will be an effective restraint on such

abuse, as the order, if it discloses extraneous or irrelevant

considerations, will be subject to judicial scrutiny and

66 [1966] 1 SCR 466.

47

correction. A speaking order will at its best be a reasonable

and at its worst be at least a plausible one. The public

should not be deprived of this only safeguard.

In the Supreme Court case of Karunadasa v. Unique Gems

Stones Ltd,67 the 2nd Respondent Commissioner made a formal

decision upon the recommendations of the 1st Respondent

Assistant Commissioner, but there were no reasons given for the

decision of the Commissioner. Mark Fernando J. on behalf of

the Supreme Court took the view that the failure to give reasons

is a violation of natural justice:

To say that Natural Justice entitles a party to a hearing

does not mean merely that his evidence and submissions

must be heard and recorded; it necessarily means that he

is entitled to a reasoned consideration of the case which he

presents. And whether or not the parties are also entitled to

be told the reasons for the decision, if they are withheld,

once judicial review commences, the decision may be

condemned as arbitrary and unreasonable; certainly, the

Court cannot be asked to presume that they were valid

reasons, for that would be to surrender its discretion. The

2nd Respondents failure to produce the 3rd Respondents

recommendation thus justified the conclusion that there

were no valid reasons, and that Natural Justice had not

been observed. The fact that the 3rd Respondent held a fair

inquiry and otherwise acted within jurisdiction does not

excuse the failure to give reasons.

67 [1997] 1 Sri LR 256.

48

The above case was, accordingly, remitted to the Court of Appeal

to re-hear, after calling for and examining the record and the

recommendations made by the Assistant Commissioner to the

Commissioner.

In Ceylon Printers Ltd v. Commissioner of Labour,68 G.P.S. de

Silva C.J. followed the above decision.

In Kusumawathie v. Aitken Spence Co. Ltd.,69 S.N. Silva J. (later

C.J.) referring to the conventional view on the giving of reasons

stated:

There is no requirement in law to give reasons should not

be construed as a gateway to arbitrary decisions and

orders. If a decision that is challenged is not a speaking

order, (carrying its reasons on its face), when notice is

issued by a Court exercising judicial review, reasons to

support it have to be disclosed with notice to the Petitioner.

Rule 52 of the Supreme Court Rules 1978, is intended to

afford an opportunity to the Respondents for this purpose.

The reasons thus disclosed form part of the record and are

in themselves subject to review.

When shall the decision-maker give reasons? The decision-

maker shall give reasons at the time of making the decision,

unless there is an agreement to the contrary. Can failure to give

reasons be remedied by giving reasons later? The answer shall

be in the negative. If reasons have been given but not

communicated to the party concerned, the situation is different.

68 [1998] 2 Sri LR 29. 69 [1996] 2 Sri LR 18 at 28.

49

In such a situation, once the appeal or judicial review is put in

motion, the decision-maker can tender the reasons to Court, as

suggested by Mark Fernando J. in Karunadasa v. Unique Gems

Stones Ltd (supra), and S.N. Silva J. (later C.J.) in

Kusumawathie v. Aitken Spence Co. Ltd (supra). If reasons are

suggested for the first time in Court, the tendency is to reject

them as afterthoughts.

In Wijepala v. Jayawardena,70 Mark Fernando J. went so far as

to say:

Although openness in administration makes it desirable

that reasons be given for decisions of this kind, in this case

I do not have to decide whether the failure to do so vitiated

the decision, However, when this Court is requested to

review such a decision, if the Petitioner succeeds in making

out a prima facie case, then the failure to give reasons

becomes crucial. If reasons are not disclosed, the inference

may have to be drawn that this is because in fact there

were no reasonsand so also, if reasons are [now]

suggested, they were in fact not the reasons, which

actually influenced the decision in the first place.

In Manickam v. The Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Defence and

External Affairs71 it was held an affidavit supplementing the

reasons already appearing on the order should not be

entertained.

70 SC 89/95 SCM of 30.06.1995 cited in Hapuarachchi v. Commissioner of Elections [2009] 1 Sri LR 1 at 12. 71 (1960) 62 NLR 204.

50

Wade explains the position in this way:

Thus the question arises whether a failure to give reasons

at or about the time of the disputed decision, may be

remedied by reasons given much later in the Respondents

affidavit responding to the grant of permission. If the duty

to give reasons is an element of natural justice, the failure

to give reasons, like any other breach of natural justice,

should render the disputed decision void. And a void

decision could not be validated by late reasons even if they

show that the decision was justified. Consistent with this

analysis the Court of Appeal has quashed a decision that

an applicant was intentionally homeless notwithstanding

that the bad reasons given when the decision was made

were supplemented by good reasons given in the

Respondents affidavit. It is not ordinarily open, the Court

of Appeal said in another case, to a decision maker, who is

required to give reasons, to respond to a challenge by giving

different or better reasons. There is always the danger that

the decision-maker in giving supplementary reasons may

drift perhaps subconsciously, into ex post facto

rationalisation of the decision. Thus decision-makers

should not be given a second bite at the cherry. European

law requires reasons to be given with the decision.72

The essence of justice is adversely affected when natural justice

is violated.

72 H.W.R. Wade and C.F. Forsyth, Administrative Law, 11th Edition, p.445.

51

As Lord Selborne once said:73 There would be no decision

within the meaning of the statute if there were anything of

that sort done contrary to the essence of justice. Quoting

these words, the Privy Council has said that it has long

been settled law that a decision which offends against the

principles of natural justice is outside the jurisdiction of the

decision-making authority. Likewise Lord Russell has

said:74 it is to be implied, unless the contrary appears, that

Parliament does not authorize by the Act the exercise of

powers in breach of the principles of natural justice, and

that Parliament does by the Act require, in the particular

procedures, compliance with those principles. Thus

violation of natural justice makes the decision void, as in

any other case of ultra vires.75

Decisions given in breach of the rules of natural justice is a

nullity and void in law.76 This was emphasised in Amaradasa v.

Land Reform Commission when it was held Breach of natural

justice goes to jurisdiction and renders the decision or

determination void, not voidable.77 If the decision is an empty

decision devoid of reasons, there is no decision in the eyes of the

law. It is a nullitynullity ab initio; badincurably bad. There is

no necessity to quash such a purported decision for there is

nothing to quash in the first place. Nevertheless, to avoid any

73 Spackman v. Plumstead District Board of Works (1885) 10 App. Cas. 229 at 240. 74 Fairmount Investments Ltd v. Secretary of State for the Environment [1976] 1 WLR 1255 at 1263. And see Ridge v. Baldwin [1964] AC 40 at 80 (a decision given without regard to the principles of natural justice is void (Lord Reid)). 75 H.W.R. Wade & C.F. Forsyth, Administrative Law, 11th Edition, p. 374-375. 76 Amarasinghe v. Wijeratne [2012] BLR 390 at 397. 77 Amaradasa v. Land Reform Commission (1977) 79(1) NLR 505 at 532.

52

confusion and for clarity, the decision can be formally quashed

by way of certiorari.78

The forgoing analysis goes to prove that the duty to give reasons

is an inherent element of natural justice, and the failure of the

Court Martial to give reasons in the instant case, like any other

breach of natural justice, should render the disputed decision a

nullity.

7. A Court of Law shall give Reasons for its Decision

The above discussion underscores in particular the importance

of giving reasons for decisions by administrative bodies and also

tribunals exercising quasi-judicial functions.

In India, a Court Martial does not appear to be recognised as a

Court. In Major Parvesh Chander Suri v. Union of India,79 it was

stated the General Court Martial is a Tribunal constituted under

the Army Act. In Union of India v. Harjeet Singh Sandhu,80 the

Supreme Court of India stated The learned counsel for the

Respondents submitted that a Court Martial convened under the

Act is a high powered special tribunal vested with very wide

jurisdiction. It cannot appropriately be called either a criminal

court merely or a service tribunal simply. It is a combination of the

two and much more than that.

78 Macfoy v. United Africa Co. Ltd. [1961] 3 All ER 1169 at 1172; Izadeen v. Director-General of Civil Aviation [1996] 2 Sri LR 348; Gunadasa v. Attorney General [1989] 2 Sri LR 130. 79 (1987) 2 GLR 1043. Vide also Subhash Chandra Sarkar v. Union of India AIR 1973 MP 191. 80 AIR 2001 SC 1772.

53

In Application for a Writ of Prohibition to be directed to the

Members of a Field General Court Martial,81 a Full Bench of the

Supreme Court of Sri Lanka considered Courts Martial to be

extraordinary Courts, which exercise not an ordinary but an

extraordinary jurisdiction under circumstances of paramount

necessity of State.

More recently, as discussed previously, a five-Judge Bench of

the Supreme Court in Sarath Fonseka v. Dhammika

Kithulegoda82 held that the Court Martial is not only a Court but

a competent Court. J.A.N. De Silva, C.J. on behalf of the

Supreme Court held:

[T]here is no contest that the concept of the Court Martial

is a reality and that it has the power to hear and try

cases, act judicially, and impose valid sentences

including imprisonment and/or death. The only quarrel

here is whether the Court Martial is any Court in terms

of Article 89 of the Constitution. The validity of the

concept of Court Martial in itself and its power to

determine cases and impose sentences of imprisonment

and/or death not being contested, and, the only contest

being its status in the hierarchy of institutions

dispensing justice, Article 13(4) of the Constitution brings

it within the description of not only a court but a

competent court, since, in terms of Article 13(4), only a

81 (1915) 18 NLR 334 at 339. 82 [2011] BLR 169 at 179.

54

competent Court can impose sentences of death or

imprisonment.83

I need hardly emphasise that although there may be a

divergence of opinion on whether an Administrative Tribunal

shall, in the absence of a statutory requirement, give reasons for

its decisions in every case, there cannot be any dispute that a

competent Court shall, nay must, give reasons for its decisions.

Giving reasons is an inherent feature of the Court. Not only

where no reasons are given, but also if the reasons given are

grossly inadequate, a Judgment will be struck down on appeal

on that ground alone.84

Hence the Court Martial being a Court of law shall give reasons

for its decisions.

8. Judicial Review on Merits

Learned ASG says The pleadings of the Petitioner filed of record

in the instant matter also contain copious references to the facts of

the case and it is respectfully submitted that such matters cannot

be revisited in a writ application of this nature. He emphasises

that the instant application being a writ application, the

Petitioner must establish the impugned decision is unlawful (as

opposed to incorrect); and, as the Petitioner has failed to

establish this, the application shall be dismissed. He cites

83 Justices Bandaranayake (later C.J.), Amaratunga, Marsoof, Sripavan (later C.J.) agreed with Silva C.J.; Justice Marsoof wrote a separate Judgment. 84 Warnakula v. Ramani Jayawardena [1990] 1 Sri LR 206; Sobanahamy v. Somadasa [2005] 3 Sri LR 201; Latheef v. Mansoor [2010] 2 Sri LR 333.

55

Browns Engineering (Pvt) Ltd. v. Commissioner of Labour85 and

Public Interest Law Foundation v. Central Environment

Authority86 in support of the proposition Under judicial review

procedure, the Court of Appeal is not concerned with the merits of

the case, that is, whether the decision was right or wrong, but

whether the decision is lawful or not.87

Having said so, learned ASG further submits:

The grounds on which the writ of certiorari may be issued

are:

(a) error of jurisdiction

(b) lack of jurisdiction

(c) excess of jurisdiction

(d) abuse of jurisdiction

(e) error of law apparent on the face of the record

(f) violation of principles of natural justice

If the Petitioner is to succeed in the instant matter, he must

satisfy court that one of the following conditions exist.

(a) There should be court, tribunal or an officer having

legal authority to determine the question with a duty

to act judicially.

(b) Such a court, tribunal or officer must have passed an

order acting without jurisdiction or in excess of the

85 [1998] 1 Sri LR 88. 86 [2001] 3 Sri LR 330. 87 [2001] 3 Sri LR 330 at 334.

56

judicial authority vested by law in such court,

tribunal or officer.

(c) The order could also be against the principles of

natural justice or the order could contain an error of

judgment in appreciating the facts of the case.

It appears learned ASG has considered the said grounds and

conditions as matters relevant to the legality of the decision

but not the correctness thereof.

Be that as it may, according to (c) above, learned ASG submits if

the Petitioner can satisfy this Court the order could also be

against the principles of natural justice or the order could contain

an error of judgment in appreciating the facts of the case, the

Petitioner can succeed in this application.

I have already stated a decision of the Court Martial devoid of

reasons is in violation of the principles of natural justice. In

fact, when a decision contains no reasons whatsoever, this

Court cannot consider whether or not the decision contains an

error of judgment in appreciating the facts of the case. In such

circumstances, this Court cannot be found fault with for

drawing the presumption that the Court Martial did not give

reasons for its decision because the facts of the case do not

support the decision.

Hence, according to the argument of learned ASG himself, the

application of the Petitioner is entitled to succeed.

57

Nonetheless, let me dispel the misconception surrounding the

tussle between the legality and correctness of decisions in the

judicial review process.

There is a misbelief that judicial review is available only against

unlawful decisions but not against wrong decisions. According

to this view, even if the decision is patently erroneous, writ does

not lie if the decision-making process was flawless. Proponents

of this proposition opine that by way of judicial review, a

decision cannot be reviewed on merits, but only on legality sans

merits. For them, errors of fact by the deciding authority are

outside the purview of writ jurisdiction. This argument is

generally supported by quoting the following passage of Wade in

isolation and out of context:

The system of judicial review is radically different from the

system of appeals. When hearing an appeal the court is

concerned with the merits of a decision: is it correct? When

subjecting some administrative act or order to judicial

review, the court is concerned with its legality: is it within

the limits of the powers granted? On an appeal the

question is right or wrong? On review the question is

lawful or unlawful?88

This supposed dichotomy between right or wrong on the one

hand and lawful or unlawful on the other, vis--vis

administrative decisions, has been obliterated over the years.

Wade himself explains this in the latter part of his treatise.89 It

88 H.W.R. Wade & C.F. Forsyth, Administrative Law, 11th Edition, p.26. 89 Vide inter alia Chapter 8 on Jurisdiction over Fact and Law and Chapter 11 on Abuse of Discretion.

58

may be observed in the above quotation that Wade restricts

legality to the question: is it within the limits of the powers

granted? But, as I will explain below, the Court can and does

look beyond this requirement.

De Smith90 whilst pointing out the courts have been slow to

recognise mistake of material fact as a ground of judicial review,

because it appears to involve the judges in assessing the merits of

a decision and turns judicial review into appeal, hastens to add

However, there have been instances where the courts have

intervened on that basis, i.e. on mistake of fact, giving an array

of cases to establish the latter position.91

Wade acknowledges that mistakes of fact can make a decision

bad in law.

Certain mistakes of fact can carry an administrative

authority or tribunal outside its jurisdiction. A rent tribunal,

for example, may have power to reduce the rent of a

dwelling-house. If it mistakenly finds that the property is a

dwelling-house when in fact it is let for business purposes,

and then purports to reduce the rent, its order will be ultra

vires and void. For its jurisdiction depends upon facts

which must exist objectively before the tribunal has power

90 De Smiths Judicial Review, 8th Edition, p. 609. 91 Hollis v. Secretary of State for the Environment (1984) 47 P. & C.R. 351; Simplex GE Holdings Ltd v. Secretary of State for the Environment (1989) 57 P. & C.R. 306; Secretary of State for Education and Science v. Tameside MBC [1977] AC 1014; Pulhofer v. Hillingdon LBC [1986] AC 484; Wandsworth LBC v. A [2000] 1 WLR 1246; R. v. Legal Aid Committee No.10 (E. Midlands) Ex p. Mc Kenna (1990) 2 Admin. LR 585; R. v. Criminal Injuries Compensation Board Ex p. A [1999] 2 AC 330; Edwards v. Bairstow [1956] AC 14 at 62; E v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ 49.

59

to act. As to these jurisdictional facts the tribunals

decision cannot be conclusive, for otherwise it could by its

own error give itself powers which were never conferred

upon it by Parliament. The fact that the tribunals order

appears good on its face can avail nothing. It will be

quashed on certiorari if the applicant can show that the true

facts do not justify it.92

This explanation illustrates how a mistake of fact can make the

decision of a tribunal ultra viresthat is a jurisdictional error.

What about non-jurisdictional errors? The traditional view is

the Courts have no jurisdiction under judicial review to look into

non-jurisdictional errors, so long as tribunals act within

jurisdiction. Accordingly, in the above example, if the property

is a dwelling-house, the Court will not interfere with the decision

of the tribunal on the basis of mistakes of fact. However, this is

not correct in modern administrative law.

The difficulty of drawing a line between jurisdictional and non-

jurisdictional errors is highlighted in the majority decision of the

House of Lords in the landmark case of Anisminic Ltd. v. Foreign

Compensation.93 Although it is not clear on a reading of the

speeches in Anisminic whether it established the rule that all

errors by a tribunal will cause the tribunal to exceed its

jurisdiction, Lord Denning MR in Pearlman v. Keepers and

Governors of Harrow School94 stated the distinction between an

error which entails absence of jurisdiction and an error made

92 H.W.R. Wade & C.F. Forsyth, Administrative Law, 11th Edition, p.208. 93 [1969] 2 AC 147. 94 [1979] QB 56 at 70. Lord Denning took the same view in several cases including R. v. Chief Immigration Officer, ex p. Kharrazi [1980] 3 All ER 373.

60

within jurisdiction was very fine and being eroded. In the House

of Lords decision in In Re Racal Communications Ltd,95 Lord

Diplock remarked The breakthrough made by Anisminic was

that, as respects administrative tribunals and authorities, the old

distinction between errors of law that went to jurisdiction and

errors of law that did not, was for practical purposes abolished.

De Smith concurs with this line of thinking when he says: The

distinction between jurisdictional and non-jurisdictional error is

ultimately based upon foundations of sand. Much of the

superstructure has already crumbled. What remains is likely

quickly to fall away as the courts rightly insists that all

administrative action should be simply, lawful, whether or not

jurisdictionally lawful.96

What is error of law and what is error of fact for the purpose of

invoking writ jurisdiction? Like jurisdictional error and non-

jurisdictional error, the distinction between error of law and

error of fact is practically non-existent. An error of law

encompasses more than the violation of a positive rule of law or

an act in excess of power. An error of fact can also be an error

of law.

According to De Smith, making a clear distinction between law

and fact is notoriously difficult, and therefore, traditional

restraint preventing the Courts from assessing facts in the

judicial review process is being blurred.

Since courts in judicial review are concerned with the law

and not the merits of a case, they will not normally interfere

95 [1981] AC 374 at 383. 96 De Smiths Judicial Review, 8th Edition, p. 228.

61

with a public authoritys assessment of the evidence or the

facts. Sometimes there is a double limitation on review for

fact, for the courts may be reviewing the decision of an

appeal tribunal which itself had jurisdiction only to review

the primary decision for errors of law. The complexity

intensifies in the light of the notorious difficulty of making a

clear distinction between law and fact. These days the

prohibition on the courts assessment of facts is being

blurred by the requirement that the decision-maker justify

all aspects of a decisionbe it law, fact, judgment or policy.

In addition, when the principle of proportionality is

engaged, a closer assessment of fact may be required.97

In the case of Ashbridge Investments Ltd. v. Minister of Housing

and Local Government,98 Lord Denning MR explained how an

error of fact can bring about the same result as an error of law.

The court can interfere with the Ministers decision if he has

acted on no evidence; or if he has come to a decision to

which on the evidence he could not reasonably come; or if

he has given a wrong interpretation to the words of the

statute; or if he has taken into consideration matters which

he ought not to have taken into account, or vice versa; or he

has otherwise gone wrong in law. It is identical with the

position when the court has power to interfere with the

decision of a lower tribunal which has erred in point of law.

97 De Smiths Judicial Review, 8th Edition, pp. 605-606. 98 [1965] 1 WLR 1320 at 1326. Vide also Collen Properties Ltd. v. Minister of Housing and Local Government [1971] 1 WLR 433.

62

What constitutes an error of law cannot be rigidly defined. In

practical terms, examples can be provided to illustrate errors of

law.

Section 31D of the Industrial Disputes Act, No. 43 of 1950, as

amended, enacts that the order of a Labour Tribunal shall be

final and shall not be called in question in any Court, except on

a question of law. In the case of Jayasuriya v. Sri Lanka State

Plantations Corporations,99 the Supreme Court had occasion to

consider the meaning given to question of law in the said

section. The Supreme Court held:

While appellate courts will not intervene with pure findings

of fact, they will review the findings treating them as a

question of law: if it appears that the Tribunal has made a

finding wholly unsupported by evidence, or which is

inconsistent with the evidence and contradictory of it; or

where the Tribunal has failed to consider material and

relevant evidence; or where it has failed to decide a

material question or misconstrued the question at issue and

had directed its attention to the wrong matters; or where

there was an erroneous misconception amounting to a

misdirection; or where it failed to consider material

documents or misconstrued them or where the Tribunal has

failed to consider the version of one party or his evidence;

or erroneously supposed there was no evidence.

99 [1995] 2 Sri LR 379.

63

In Collettes Ltd. v. Bank of Ceylon,100 in considering what

constitutes a question of law within the meaning of the

provisions of Article 128(1) of the Constitution, a Divisional

Bench of the Supreme Court acknowledged questions of law

and questions of fact are sometimes difficult to disentangle, and

held inter alia Where there is or is not evidence to support a

finding, is a question of law. The Supreme Court defined

question of law in the following terms:

(a) The proper legal effect of a proved fact is necessarily a

question of law. A question of law is to be distinguished

from a question of fact. Questions of law and questions of

facts are sometimes difficult to disentangle.

(b) Inferences from the primary facts found are matters of law.

(c) The question whether the tribunal has misdirected itself on

the law or the facts or misunderstood them or has taken

into account irrelevant considerations or has failed to take

into account relevant considerations or has reached a

conclusion which no reasonable tribunal directing itself

properly on law could have reached or that it has gone

fundamentally wrong in certain other respects is a question

of law. Given the primary facts, the question whether the

tribunal rightly exercised its discretion is a question of law.

(d) Whether the evidence is in the legal sense sufficient to

support a determination of fact is a question of law.

100 [1982] 2 Sri LR 514 at 515.

64

(e) If in order to arrive at a conclusion on facts it is necessary

to construe a document of title or correspondence then the

construction of the document or correspondence becomes a

question of law.

(f) Every question of legal interpretation which arises after the

primary facts have been established is a question of law.

(g) Whether there is or is not evidence to support a finding, is a

question of law.

(h) Whether the provisions of a statute apply to the facts; what

is the proper interpretation of a statutory provision; what is

the scope and effect of such provision are all questions of

law.

(i) Whether the evidence had been properly admitted or

excluded or there is misdirection as to the burden of proof

are all questions of law.

Error of law on the face of the record can be made use of to

quash erroneous decisions, notwithstanding the decision-

making process was flawless.

In All Ceylon Commercial and Industrial Workers Union v. Nestle

Lanka Limited,101 Jayasuriya J. observed:

In R. v. Northumberland Compensation Appeal Tribunalex

parte Shaw 1951 1 KB 711 (Affirmed in 1952 1 KB 338),

the Divisional Court of the Kings Bench Division held that

certiorari would issue to quash the decision of a statutory

101 [1999] 1 Sri LR 343 at 350.

65

administration tribunal for an error of law on the face of the

record, even though that tribunal was not a court of record

and although that error did not go to the jurisdiction of the

tribunal. This decision pronounced by Lord Denning

appeased at least to a certain extent, the public demand for

better justice in the welfare state and it marked the

commencement of a new era of judicial review.

The wrongful rejection of admissible evidence and wrongful

admission of inadmissible evidence in the decision-making

process are incidents of errors of law on the face of the record.

If the deciding authority has manifestly failed to properly

evaluate the evidence led before it, the decision can be quashed

on the ground of error of law on the face of the record.

According to De Smith The wrongful rejection of evidence by a

decision-maker may also amount either to a failure to take into

account a relevant consideration and or to a failure to afford

procedural propriety and thus render the decision unlawful.102

In Chithrasiri v. National Gem and Jewellery Authority,103 after

an inquiry, the Gem Authority issued a gem mining licence in

favour of the respondent on the primary basis that the title to

the land was established by a partition decree. The Petitioner,

seeking to quash the said decision by certiorari, convinced this

Court that the said partition decree was not relevant to the land

the license was issued to but to a different land, and thereby the

Authority had clearly gone wrong on facts in issuing the licence.

102 De Smiths Judicial Review, 8th Edition, pp. 612-613. 103 CA/WRIT/38/2016, CA Minutes of 31.05.2018.

66

The argument of the Respondent was not that the said decree

was relevant to the land, but that the writ Court could not

quash the decision on that ground, as it affected the correctness

of the decision and not its legality. This Court refused the said

argument of the Respondent and quashed the decision by

certiorari on the ground of error of law on the face of the record.

In Brook Bond (Ceylon) Ltd. v. Tea, Rubber, Coconut and General

Produce Workers Union,104 it was held The refusal of the

Tribunal to consider material facts constituted error of law.

It was decided in Sithamparanathan v. Peoples Bank,105 Failure

to properly evaluate evidence or to take into account relevant

considerations in such evaluation is a question of law.

A similar conclusion was reached in Fonseka v. Candappa,106

where it was decided:

It becomes a question of law where relevant evidence

bearing on a fact has not been considered or irrelevant

matters have been given undue importance or the

conclusions rest mainly on erroneous considerations or is

not supported by sufficient evidence.

Unreasonable decisions, De Smith points out, are unlawful

decisions, liable to be overturned by certiorari:

the question of what is relevant or material consideration is

a question of law, whereas the question of what weight to

104 (1973) 77 NLR 6. 105 [1989] 1 Sri LR 124. 106 [1988] 2 Sri LR 11.

67

be given to it is a matter for the decision-maker. However,

where undue weight is given to any particular

consideration, this may result in the decision being held to

be unreasonable, and therefore unlawful, because

manifestly excessive or manifestly inadequate weight has

been accorded to a relevant consideration.107

In Gunasekera v. De Mel, Commissioner of Labour,108 where the

order of the Commissioner of Labour was sought to be quashed

by way of certiorari, the Supreme Court gave a broader

interpretation to lack of jurisdiction and error of law on the face

of the record:

Lack of jurisdiction may arise in different ways. While

engaged on a proper inquiry the tribunal may depart from

the rules of natural justice or it may ask itself the wrong

questions or may take into account matters which it was

not directed to take into account. Thereby it would step

outside its jurisdiction. A tribunal which has made findings

of fact wholly unsupported by evidence or which it has

drawn inferences wholly unsupported by any of the facts

found by it will be held to have erred in point of law. The

concept of error of law includes the giving of reasons that

are bad in law or inconsistent, unintelligible or it would

seem substantially inadequate. It includes also the

application of a wrong legal test to the facts found taking

irrelevant considerations into account and arriving at a

conclusion without any supporting evidence. If reasons are

107 De Smiths Judicial Review, 8th Edition, p. 602. 108 (1978) 79(2) NLR 409 at 426.

68

given and these disclose that an erroneous legal approach

has been followed the superior Court can set the decision

aside by certiorari for error of law on the face of the record.

If the grounds or reasons stated disclose a clearly

erroneous legal approach the decision will be quashed. An

error of law may also be held to be apparent on the face of

the record if the inferences and decisions reached by the

tribunal in any given case are such as no reasonable body

of persons properly instructed in the law applicable to the

case could have made.

If a decision is inconsistent with the weight of evidence led,

certiorari is available to quash the decision. In Health & Co

(Ceylon) Ltd. v. Kariyawasam,109 the decision of the Arbitrator

was quashed on this basis:

In the assessment of evidence, an arbitrator appointed

under the Industrial Disputes Act must act judicially. Where

his finding is completely contrary to the weight of evidence,

his award is liable to be quashed by way of certiorari.

The conclusion was similar in Wijerama v. Paul,110 where the

decision in question was set aside by certiorari inter alia on the

premise:

A tribunal which draws an inference wholly unsupported

by the primary facts errs in point of law.

109 (1968) 71 NLR 382 at 384. 110 (1973) 76 NLR 241 at 258.

69

In Virakesari Ltd v. Fernando,111 it was held The omission of an

inferior tribunal to take into consideration a relevant document

forming part of the record, or a misconstruction of such document,

is an error of law appearing on the face of the record.

In Mudanayake v. Sivagnanasunderam,112 the decision sought to

be quashed was not allowed to stand, as it was the opinion of

the Court:

Certiorari lies not only where the inferior Court has acted

without or in excess of its jurisdiction but also where the

inferior Court has stated on the face of the order the

grounds on which it had made it and it appears that in law

those grounds are not such as to warrant the decision to

which it had come.

In Chas Hayley and Co. Ltd., v. Commercial and Industrial

Workers,113 Senanayake J. elaborated on what constitutes an

error of law on the face of the record as a ground for certiorari:

It is well settled that the order of an inferior tribunal having

a duty to act reasonably in determining the rights of the

parties is liable to be quashed by Writ of Certiorari for an

error of law appearing on the face of the record. A finding of

fact may be impugned on the ground of error of law on the

face of the record (a) erroneously refusing to admit

admissible material evidence (b) erroneously admitting

inadmissible evidence which influence the finding (c) finding

111 (1963) 66 NLR 145 at 150-151. 112 (1951) 53 NLR 25 at 31. 113 [1995] 2 Sri LR 42 at 49-50.

70

based on no evidence (d) where the tribunal had acted with

manifest or clear unreasonableness or unfairness. The

misconstruction of the document becomes an error on the

face of the record.

I am of the view that the Arbitrator had misconstrued the

document R16b when he failed to consider that the loss

depicted in the Report and speculated on the fact that it

was temporary without any evidence. There was no

evidence for such a finding. This was unreasonable and

unfair. The evidence revealed that the employees were

getting a higher wage than prescribed by the Wages Board

Ordinance. They were paid more than the other competitors

in the Trade. The Arbitrator failed to consider the heavy

financial loss and had acted unreasonably and unfairly in

granting 30 percent increase in wages with a 10% increase

in productivity was an error of law on the face of the record.

In the circumstances, I quash the award of the 2nd

Respondent by granting a writ of Certiorari.

The violation of principles of natural justice, according to

Gunadasa v. Attorney-General,114 amounts to an error of law on

the face of the record:

That the failure to give the Petitioner a fair opportunity to

correct or contradict the material witnesses when they

gave evidence, has occasioned a violation of the principles

of natural justice; that a mans defence must always be

fairly heard. The non-observance of the said principles of

114 [1989] 2 Sri LR 130.

71

natural justice, would consequently amount to an error on

the face of the record, which would attract the remedy of

Writ of Certiorari.

The failure to make available the documents relevant to the

defence of the Petitioner, at the hearing, amounted to an

error on the face of the record, and the Writ of Certiorari

would lie in such situations also.

In Nalini Ellegala v. Poddalagoda,115 on an application made by

the appellant landlord, the Rent Board held that the premises in

dispute were excepted premises in terms of the Rent Act. The

tenant appealed to the Board of Review under the Act which

provides for an appeal upon a matter of law. The Board of

Review found that the Rent Board had failed to properly evaluate

the evidence and, on that basis, set aside the order of the Rent

Board and decided that the premises were governed by the Rent

Act. The landlord unsuccessfully moved the Court of Appeal to

quash the decision of the Board of Review by certiorari. On

appeal to the Supreme Court, the decision of the Court of Appeal

was upheld on the ground that failure to properly evaluate

evidence is an error of law.

In the above case, the Supreme Court further recognised the no

evidence rule as forming another branch of the principle of ultra

vires. Wijetunga J. held:

The main ground adduced before the Court of Appeal was

that the Rent Board of Review was in error in entertaining

the appeal which was not founded on a question of law.

115 [1999] 1 Sri LR 46.

72

The Court of Appeal observed that if the true and only

reasonable conclusion contradicts the determination

reached by the tribunal, the conclusion may be set aside on

the ground that there has been an error of law, which was

responsible for the determination, and proceeded to hold

that the Board of Review has not acted outside its

jurisdiction in entertaining the appeal and making its

decision on a matter of law.116

In Hasseen v. Gunasekera and others,117 the Court of

Appeal dealt with an order of the Board of Review,

affirming an order of the Rent Board which had been

arrived at without an adequate evaluation of the evidence

and by failing to take into consideration relevant items of

evidence which could have influenced the finding and held

the Rent Board as well as the Board of Review had erred

in law by failing to take into account relevant items of

evidence in arriving at the finding and therefore quashed

the orders of the Rent Board as well as of the Board of

Review.

Wade & Forsyth, Administrative Law, 7th edition at page

312 dealing with the no evidence rule states that no

evidence does not mean only a total dearth of evidence. It

extends to any case where the evidence, taken as a whole,

is not reasonably capable of supporting the finding, or

where, in other words, no tribunal could reasonably reach

that conclusion on that evidence. It goes on to state at

116 At 51. 117 CA Application No.128/86, CA Minutes of 2.10.1995.

73

page 316 that It seems clear that this ground of judicial

review ought now to be regarded as established on a

general basis, and forecasts that no evidence seems

destined to take its place as yet a further branch of the

principle of ultra vires, so that Acts giving powers of

determination will be taken to imply that the determination

must be based on some acceptable evidence. If it is not, it

will be treated as arbitrary, capricious and obviously

unauthorised.

Applying these principles to the matter before us, and

having regard to the facts aforementioned, I am of the view

that the Rent Board had failed to properly evaluate the

evidence and such failure was a question of law upon

which the Board of Review was entitled to exercise its

powers under section 40 of the Act.118

The no evidence rule shall not be afforded an overly restrictive

interpretation. No evidence does not mean no evidence at all.

Rather, it means insufficient evidence to support the impugned

decision. In the words of Wade:

It is one thing to weigh conflicting evidence which might

justify a conclusion either way, or to evaluate evidence

wrongly. It is another thing altogether to make

insupportable findings. This is an abuse of power and may

cause grave injustice. At this point, therefore, the court is

disposed to intervene.

118 [1999] 1 Sri LR 46 at 51-52.

74

No evidence does not mean only a total dearth of evidence.

It extends to any case where the evidence, taken as a

whole, is not reasonably capable of supporting the finding;

or where, in other words, no tribunal could reasonably

reach that conclusion on that evidence. This no evidence

principle clearly has something in common with the

principle that perverse or unreasonable action is

unauthorised and ultra vires.119

Lord Atkinson in Folkestone Cpn. v. Brockman120 stated an

order made without any evidence to support it is in truth, in my

view, made without jurisdiction.

Wade considers the no evidence rule as a firmly established,

albeit more recent, ground for judicial review, and states older

authorities to the contrary, impressive though they are, must now

be consigned to the scrapheap of history. No evidence thus takes

place as yet a further branch of the principle of ultra vires. The

time is ripe for this development as part of the judicial policy of

preventing abuse of discretionary power. To find facts without

evidence is itself an abuse of power and a source of injustice, and

it ought to be within the scope of judicial review.121

De Smiths Judicial Review,122 under the sub-heading Decisions

unsupported by substantial evidence says:

This encompasses situations where there is no evidence

for a finding upon which a decision depends or where the

119 H.W.R. Wade & C.F. Forsyth, Administrative Law, 11th Edition, p. 227. 120 [1914] AC 338 at 367. 121 H.W.R. Wade & C.F. Forsyth, Administrative Law, 11th Edition, p.230. 122 De Smiths Judicial Review, 8th Edition, p. 611.

75

evidence, taken as a whole, is not reasonably capable of

supporting a finding of fact. Such decisions may be

impugned as irrational or perverse, providing that this

was a finding as to a material matter.123

Craig also acknowledges The courts now generally regard no

evidence as a ground for review, and further says The way is

now open for review of the evidence supporting the decision-

makers findings.124

In Sri Lanka, the no evidence rule has been recognised as a

component of natural justice. In Sirisena Cooray v. Tissa Dias

Bandaranayake,125 on behalf of the Supreme Court,

Dheeraratne J. making reference to Mohan Mahon v. Air New

123 Decisions unsupported by evidence have been held to be unreasonable in Osgood v. Nelson (1872) LR 5 HL 636; R. v. Attorney General Ex p. Imperial Chemical Industries Plc (1986) 60 Tax Cas. 1; R. v. Birmingham City Council Ex p. Sheptonhurst Ltd [1990] 1 All ER 1026 (no evidence in licensing decision on sex establishment irrational); R. v. Housing Benefit Review Board of Sutton LBC Ex p. Keegan (1995) 27 HLR 92 (lack of evidence of failure to pay rent rendered decision unreasonable; Piggott Bros and Co Ltd v. Jackson [1992] 1 CR 85 (Lord Donaldson MR, in the context of employment law, held that to find a decision perverse, the appeal tribunal had to be able to identify a finding of fact unsupported by any evidence); Peak Park Joint Planning Board v. Secretary of State for the Environment [1991] JPL 744 (a conclusion which flew in the face of the evidence and was based on a view of the facts which could not reasonably be entertained was held to be perverse). Sometimes such decisions have been held to involve excess of jurisdiction, e.g. Ashbridge Investments [1965] 1 WLR 1320. Lord Diplock occasionally held that the principles of natural justice required a decision to be based on evidential material of probative value, e.g. Attorney General v. Ryan [1980] AC 718; R. v. Deputy Industrial Injuries Commissioner Ex p. Moore [1965] 1 QB 456 (reached a verdict that no reasonable coroner could have reached). In R. (on the application of Mott) v. Environment Agency [2015] EWHC 314 (Admin); [2015] Env. LR 27 the imposition of conditions upon a licence to fish was held irrational where the decision-maker had failed to consider whether the evidence upon which it based its decision was credible and capable of supporting the conclusions drawn from it. 124 P.P. Craig, Administrative Law, 4th Edition, p. 491. 125 [1999] 1 Sri LR 1 at 33.

76

Zealand126 and R. v. Deputy Industrial Injuries Commissioner, ex

p. Moore127 stated Principles of natural justice require that a

tribunals decisions are based on some evidence of probative

value.

Our Courts, following English decisions, have taken a liberal

approach on questions of no evidence, error of law and mistake

of fact etc., in that no forceful attempt has been made to limit

writ jurisdiction only to lack or excess of jurisdiction of the

deciding authority.

There is no need to panic that the Courts, in the exercise of

judicial review, will set aside administrative decisions whenever

they are found to be faulty. An error of law ipso facto will not

give the Courts carte blanche to review decisions on the basis of

what the Courts consider to be fair and reasonable on merits.

Writ being a discretionary remedy, the Court can decide whether

or not the error in question is of sufficient significance to justify

the writ. For instance, Lord Denning was able to side with the

majority opinion in Baldwin & Francis Ltd v. Patents Appeal

Tribunal128 to hold that although an error of law did appear

upon the face of the record, it was not an error which would

warrant the remedy of certiorari.

Cooray states:129

126 [1984] 3 All ER 201 (PC). 127 [1965] 1 All ER 81. 128 [1959] AC 663 at 696. 129 Sunil F.A. Cooray, Principles of Administrative Law in Sri Lanka, 3rd Edition, Vol 2, p.829.

77

Certiorari will not issue for any and every error of law

contained in the order to be quashed. The error must be

material to the order in the sense that the order should be

wholly or partly based on it. Where an Industrial Court

made an award and gave three reasons for it only one of

which was an error of law, certiorari was issued to quash

the award because the Court had little doubt that the error

of law was on a point deemed material by the industrial

court itself.130

Where only some findings made in the process of exercising

power are based on errors of law, certiorari will issue to

quash only those findings and other findings which are not

based on error of law the Court will allow to stand.131

Coming back to the instant matter under review, the above

discussion reinforces the importance of giving reasons for

decisions. In sum, if the reasons given for a decision by the

Court Martial are ex facie unacceptable, this Court can quash

the decision by certiorari, inter alia, on the no evidence rule or

error of law on the face of the record. If no reasons are given for

the decision, the result is inevitablethe decision will be

quashed by certiorari.

Let me now have a closer look at the two JudgmentsBrowns

Engineering (Pvt) Ltd. v. Commissioner of Labour132 and Public

Interest Law Foundation v. Central Environment

130 Shell Company of Ceylon Ltd. v. Perera (1967) 70 NLR 108 at 112. 131 In Virakesari Ltd. v. Fernando (1963) 66 NLR 145, the Court considered separately whether the several findings of the officer were or were not based on error of law. 132 [1998] 1 Sri LR 88.

78

Authority133cited by learned ASG to say that this Court cannot

in the exercise of writ jurisdiction go into the merits of the case

or decision.

In Browns Engineering (Pvt) Ltd. v. Commissioner of Labour,134

the employer came before this Court seeking to quash the

decision of the Commissioner of Labour on the ground that the

computation of compensation awarded to the employees was

bad in law. Whilst dismissing the application, Jayasuriya J.

observed:

In considering and evaluating the submissions of learned

counsel for the Petitioner, in his impugnment of the

assessment of compensation and the ascertainment of the

quantum of compensation payable by the Petitioner-

company to the aforesaid workmen, this court must

necessarily have in the forefront of its mind that it is

exercising in this instance a very limited jurisdiction quite

distinct from the exercise of appellate jurisdiction. Relief by

way of certiorari in relation to award of compensation

pronounced by the Commissioner of Labour will be

available to quash an award of compensation only if the

Commissioner of Labour wholly or in part assumes a

jurisdiction which he does not have or exceeds that which

he has or acts contrary to principles of natural justice or

pronounces an award which is eminently unreasonable or

irrational or is guilty of a substantial error of law. The

remedy by way of certiorari cannot be made use of to

133 [2001] 3 Sri LR 330. 134 [1998] 1 Sri LR 88.

79

correct errors or to substitute a correct order for a wrong

order and if the Commissioners award of compensation

was not set aside in whole or in part, it had to be allowed

to stand unreversed. The system of Judicial review is

radically different from the system of appeals. When

hearing an appeal, a court is concerned with the merits of

the decision under appeal; when subjecting some

administrative act or order to judicial review, the court is

concerned with its legality. On an appeal the question is

right or wrong? On review the question is lawful or

unlawful? Judicial review is a fundamentally different

operation to the exercise of appellate jurisdiction. A court on

review is concerned only with the question whether the

award under attack should be allowed to stand or not. Vide

Prof. H. W. R. Wade on Administrative Law, 7th edition,

pages 38 to 39. Thus, the object of this court upon judicial

review is strictly to consider whether the whole or part of

the award of compensation pronounced by the

Commissioner of Labour is lawful or unlawful. This court

ought not to exercise its appellate powers and jurisdiction

when engaged in the exercise of its supervisory jurisdiction

and judicial review over an award of compensation decreed

by the Commissioner of Labour. In this respect, I would

reiterate the prudent and wise observations made by

Justice Samarawickrema in Silva v. Kuruppu (SC 182/69,

SC Minutes 14.10.71).135

135 At 105-106.

80

In the above passage, if I may repeat, Jayasuriya J. correctly

states that relief by way of certiorari will be available if the

Commissioner of Labour:

wholly or in part assumes a jurisdiction which he does not

have or exceeds that which he has or acts contrary to

principles of natural justice or pronounces an award which

is eminently unreasonable or irrational or is guilty of a

substantial error of law.

Having stated so, there is no necessity to give a restrictive

interpretation to the word jurisdiction and the phrase error of

law, in order to exclude the merits of the matter from

consideration.

The word jurisdiction shall not be confined to territorial

jurisdiction or the powers conferred on the decision-making

body by statute or otherwise. As explained earlier, for instance,

A tribunal which has made findings of fact wholly unsupported

by evidence or which it has drawn inferences wholly unsupported

by any of the facts found by it will be held to have erred in point

of law, which results in the decision having been made without

jurisdiction.136 This also goes to prove an error of law cannot

be narrowly interpreted only to mean a violation of a provision of

a statute. The failure to properly evaluate evidence is an error

of law, which in turn warrants quashing the decision taken

thereby.137

136 Gunasekera v. De Mel, Commissioner of Labour (1978) 79(2) NLR 409 at 426. 137 Sithamparanathan v. Peoples Bank [1989] 1 Sri LR 124.

81

However, Jayasuriya J. in the concluding paragraph of the

Judgment in Browns Engineering (Pvt) Ltd. (supra) gives reasons

for the dismissal of the application in the following terms:

I hold that the award of compensation made by the

Commissioner of Labour is lawful and in the assessment of

compensation he has acted on correct and legal principles

which have been consistently laid down by the superior

courts in Sri Lanka. I hold that there is no substantial

misdirection in point of fact or law, there is no failure on the

part of the Commissioner of Labour and the Assistant

Commissioner of Labour to take into consideration the effect

of the totality of the evidence led at the inquiry, there is no

improper evaluation of evidence, neither is there any

application of incorrect and illegal principles on a

consideration of the totality of the evidence led at the

inquiry and the findings and recommendations of the

Assistant Commissioner and the order of the Commissioner

of Labour. In the circumstances, I hold that there is no error

of law disclosed on a perusal of the record. The

Commissioner of Labour has considered the totality of the

oral and documentary evidence led at the inquiry, the

findings and recommendations of the Assistant

Commissioner of Labour and the material in the record

bearing number TE/57/94 and pronounced his order which

is sought to be impugned before this court. In the

circumstances, I make order dismissing the application of

the Petitioner-company with costs.

82

It is clear from the above that the Court did not dismiss the

application on legality devoid of merits. The Court, in fact,

dismissed the application on merits.

Jayasuriya J. took the same view in Kalamazoo Industries Ltd v.

Minister of Labour & Vocational Training,138 a case where the

Petitioners sought to quash an arbitral award by certiorari. The

dismissal of the application was justified in this way:

There is no misdirection in point of fact or law which

vitiates the award. There is no failure on the part of the

arbitrator to take into consideration the effect of the totality

of the oral and documentary evidence placed before him

and there is no improper evaluation of the evidence placed

before the arbitrator on a consideration of the award and

the totality of the evidence placed before him in this

matter.139

Having said the above, Jayasuriya J. remarked that in judicial

review the Court is concerned with legality and not

correctness.140 This general observation does not correctly

explain the present position of the law.

However, in All Ceylon Commercial and Industrial Workers Union

v. Nestle Lanka Limited,141 decided two years after the aforesaid

two decisions, Jayasuriya J. did not opine that in judicial review

the Courts cannot look into the merits of the matter. Instead,

applying the no evidence rule and error of law on the face of the

138 [1998] 1 Sri LR 235. 139 At 248-249. 140 At 249. 141 [1999] 1 Sri LR 343.

83

record, he went into the merits of the case to quash the

impugned decision by certiorari on the basis that there was no

evidence to support the decision.

Thus, there is no evidence or material which has been

adduced which could support the aforesaid inference and

findings reached by the fourth respondent. Findings and

decisions unsupported by evidence are capricious,

unreasonable or arbitrary. Minister of National Revenue v.

Wrights Canadian Ropes Ltd.,142 Argosy Company Ltd. v.

IRC,143 Osgood v. Nelson,144 Maradana Mosque Trustees v.

Mahamud,145 De Smith in his judicial review of

Administrative Action - 4th edition page 133 - sets out the

principle that a deciding authority which has made a

finding of primary fact wholly unsupported by evidence or

which has drawn an inference wholly unsupported by any

of the primary facts found by it will be held to have erred in

point of lawThe no evidence rule is well-established

and it has established itself because superior courts

exercising appellate or supervisory jurisdiction in respect of

errors of law need to have power to intervene wherever

manifest and gross error is revealed.

The no evidence rule does not contemplate a total lack of

evidence; it is equally applicable where the evidence taken

as a whole, is not reasonably capable of supporting the

finding or decision (vide Allinson v. General Medical Council

142 [1947] AC 109. 143 [1971] 1 WLR 514. 144 [1872] LR 5 HL 636. 145 [1967] 1 AC 13.

84

[1894] 1 QB 750 at 760 or where no deciding authority

could reasonably reach that conclusion on that evidence

(vide R. v. Roberts [1908] 1 KB 407 at 423).

Lord Atkinson in Folkestone Corporation v. Brockmad

[1914] AC 338 at 367 remarked: an order made without

any evidence to support it is in truth, in my view, made

without jurisdiction. Contra - R. v. Net Bell Liquors Ltd.

[1922] AC 128 at 151 per Lord Sumner. R. v. Ludlow [1947]

KB 634 per Lord Goddard CJ. However, Lord Denning in

Oreilly v. Mackman [1983] 2 AC 237 at 253 has impugned

the statement of the law pronounced by Lord Sumner as the

darkest moment of the blackout of any development of

Administrative Law. Other decisions have described a no

evidence finding as unreasonable, perverse and arbitrary

and therefore ultra vires for other reasons.

Wade and Forsyth on Administrative Law - 7th edition at

page 316 - conclude that despite the absence of an

authoritative decision reviewing the justification for and

against the no evidence rule, it seems clear that this

ground of judicial review ought now to be regarded as

established on a general basisit conforms so well to other

developments in administrative law that one can only

assume that the older authorities to the contrary,

impressive though they are, may now be consigned to the

limbo of history. No evidence seems destined to take its

place as yet a further branch of the principle of ultra vires,

so that Acts giving powers of determination will be taken to

imply that the determination must be made upon some

85

acceptable evidence. If it is not, it will be treated as

arbitrary, capricious, and obviously unauthorised.

I hold that there is an error on the face of the record which

entitles this Court in the exercise of its power of certiorari to

quash the aforesaid award as the finding in regard to

ground five had been reached bereft of any evidence or any

material which has been elicited before the arbitrator.

The above Judgment of Jayasuriya J. was quoted with approval

in the Supreme Court case of Singer Industries (Ceylon) Ltd. v.

Ceylon Mercantile Industrial and General Workers Union.146 The

question to be decided in the said case was whether the

employer had agreed to give a maximum of 3/4th of a months

salary as gratuity to employees who had served more than 20

years. After an inquiry, the Arbitrator decided that the employer

had so agreed. The decision was upheld by the Court of Appeal

when the employer moved to set aside the decision by certiorari.

On appeal, the Supreme Court went into the merits of the case

and set aside both the Award and the Judgment of the Court of

Appeal on the ground that there was insufficient evidence to

prove willingness on the part of the employer to give such a

concession to the employees. I must emphasise there was no

hesitation whatsoever on the part of the Supreme Court to

scrutinise the evidence led before the Arbitrator in order to

consider the correctness of the decision. Ekanayake J. (with the

concurrence of J.A.N. de Silva C.J. and Thilakawardena J.) held:

146 [2010] 1 Sri LR 66.

86

The arbitrator had concluded that the respondent company

had shown its willingness as far back as 1991 to give a

maximum of 3/4th of months salary as gratuity for those

who had served more than 20 years. Having considered the

evidence that had been available before the arbitrator I am

unable to agree with the above conclusion that the

respondent had shown such willingness as far back as

1991. That appears to be a finding which was not

supported by evidence led in the arbitration and in fact

appellants only witness, Leelaratnes evidence had been

totally contrary to the above. In the light of the above the

only legitimate conclusion one could arrive upon the

evidence is that there had been no final agreement between

the 1st respondent, (CMU) and the appellant company in

respect of enhanced gratuity payments. From the evidence

available on record there is nothing to infer that the

petitioner company had shown its willingness to give 3/4th

of a months salary as gratuity for those who have more

than 20 years service as concluded by the learned Court of

Appeal Judge.147

Having considered the evidence had before the arbitrator

and the conclusions of the arbitrator in his award (P2) I am

of the view that the arbitrators findings and decisions are

not supported by the evidence before him. Further, for the

reasons stated above the learned Court of Appeal Judge too

had erred when he proceeded to state that The findings

147 At 83-84.

87

and the decision of the arbitrator is in accordance with the

evidence led in the inquiry.148

The other case referred to by learned ASG is Public Interest Law

Foundation v. Central Environmental Authority.149 In the said

case, the Petitioners sought to quash the decision of the Central

Environment Authority to construct the Southern Expressway

on two grounds: (i) failure to analyse or consider reasonable and

environmentally friendly alternatives to the proposed project; (ii)

lack of proper intelligible and adequate reasons in the

Environmental Impact Assessment report for the rejection of

alternatives to the project. The Court analysed the evidence

presented by both parties to conclude there was no merit in both

the said grounds.150

In addition, the Court stated:

The Court is ill equipped, in any event, to form an opinion

on environmental matters they being best left to people

who have specialised knowledge and skills in such

spheres. Even if a matter may seem to be preeminently one

of public law, the Courts may decline to exercise review

because it is felt that the matter is not justiciable, i.e. not

suitable to judicial determination. The reason for non-

justiciability is that Judges are not expert enough deal with

the matter.151

Furthermore, Gunawardana J. remarked:

148 At 86. 149 [2001] 3 Sri LR 330. 150 At 334. 151 At 333.

88

There is a distinction between appeal and review. If one

appeals against a decision, one is claiming that the decision

is wrong and that appellate authority or court should

change the decision. The Court of Appeal, if it is persuaded

by the merits of the case (appeal), may allow the appeal

and thereby substitute its view for that of the Court or

tribunal of first instance. Under judicial review procedure,

the Court of Appeal is not concerned with the merits of the

case, that is, whether the decision was right or wrong, but

whether the decision is lawful or not. In the words of Lord

Brightman: Judicial review is concerned, not with the

decision but with the decision making process (Chief

Constable of North Wales Police v. Evans [1982] 1 WLR

1155 at 1173). It is worth observing that the review

procedure is not well suited to determination of disputed

facts - factual issues arising in this case being imprecise

and disputed.152

There is no necessity to highlight the above quoted last part of

the said Judgment in preference to previous parts which decided

the matter on merits.

Four months after the above Judgment, Gunawardana J., in the

case of Geeganage v. Director General of Customs,153 had the

opportunity of looking at the same issue from a different angle.

In the said case, the goods imported did not tally with the

Customs Declaration, but the importer removed the goods from

the warehouse without the correct duties being paid, thereby

152 At 334. 153 [2001] 3 Sri LR 179.

89

defrauding the State of revenue at a sum of Rs. 2,304,766. The

charge against the Petitioner, an Assistant Superintendent of

Customs, was that he knowingly permitted this. After an

inquiry, the Director General of Customs imposed a forfeiture of

Rs. 500,000 on the Petitioner, in terms of section 129 of the

Customs Ordinance. The Petitioner came before the Court of

Appeal seeking to quash the said decision by certiorari, inviting

the Court to substitute its view on an interpretation of the

factual matters elicited at the inquiry. Gunawardana J., who

was constrained to go through the evidence led at the impugned

inquiry, rested his decision on errors of law committed by the

inquiring officer and on the no evidence rule.

The decision of the 2nd respondent (inquiring officer) is liable

to be set aside as it is vitiated by following errors of law

which renders the decision of the 2nd respondent a nullity;

(i) the 2nd respondent had in reaching the decision failed

to take relevant considerations into account whilst he

had allowed legally irrelevant factors to influence the

decision;

(ii) The decision of the 2nd respondent is based on no

evidence and as such is erroneous in law;

(iii) There is nothing to show that the 2nd respondent was

satisfied that the charge or the case against the

petitioner was proved to the requisite standard of

proof which, in this instance, is undoubtedly proof

beyond reasonable doubt.154

154 At 184.

90

Gunawardena J. acknowledged that no evidence does not mean

total lack of evidence but evidence insufficient to support the

finding.

The other feature which is worth observing is that the 2nd

respondents decision, it could be said, is based on no

evidence. In a sense, no evidence rule is a ground of old

wine in new bottles because review under the head of lack

of evidence can be seen as a species of unreasonableness,

in that no reasonable body would come to a decision

unsupported by evidence. There is a growing body of case

law reflecting the view that to act without evidence is to act

ultra vires. As Wade explains no evidence does not mean

a total lack or dearth of evidence. He sheds more light on

what no evidence means as follows: It extends to any

case where the evidence, taken as a whole, is not

reasonably capable of supporting the finding.155

No evidence rule has, of necessity, to be applied in

conjunction with the requisite standard of proof in any

given case. I have explained above that the question that

the court of review has to consider in the circumstances of

this case is this: does the totality of evidence on record

reasonably justify the conclusion beyond a reasonable

doubt that the petitioner had knowingly allowed the

importers to remove the cargo without payment of due

duties.156

155 At 189. 156 Ibid.

91

How can the writ Court consider whether or not, as quoted

above, the evidence, taken as a whole, is not reasonably capable

of supporting the finding, without going into the merits of the

matter?

It is reassuring to note, in the said judgement, Gunawardana J.

accepts that the no evidence rule has blurred the traditional

distinction between appeal and judicial review.

In a way, the application of the no evidence rule may,

perhaps, result in a blurring of the distinction between

supervisory role of the court (under the judicial review

procedure) and the appellate jurisdiction of the court

because the courts exercise under this head i.e. under the

concept of no evidence necessarily entails a consideration

of the strength of the evidence. The equivalent rule in the

United State allows a reviewing court to determine whether

an administrative determination made after a formal

hearing is supported by substantial evidence on the record

taken as a whole.157

The distinction between judicial review and appellate jurisdiction

referred to in the above quotation has been set out at page 183

of the said Judgment in the following manner:

Under the judicial review procedure the court is not

concerned with the merits of the case, that is, whether the

decision is right or wrong. In review (as opposed to appeal)

the court only considers whether the decision is lawful or

unlawful. In the words of Lord Brightman, judicial review

157 At 189.

92

is concerned, not with the decision, but with the decision

making process. Chief Constable of the North Wales

Police v. Evans [1982] 1 WLR 1155.

The above statement of Lord Brightman has been quoted with

approval in subsequent decisions of the Court of Appeal.

In De Wass Gunawardhana v. National Police Commission,158 the

Court of Appeal observed:

As Lord Brightman stated in the House of Lords in Chief

Constable of North Wales Police v Evans [1982] 1 WLR

1155 at 1174, applications for judicial review are often

misconceived: Judicial review is concerned, not with the

decision, but with the decision making process. Unless that

restriction on the power of the court is observed, the court

will in my view, under the guise of preventing the abuse of

power, be itself guilty of usurping power...Judicial review,

as the words imply, is not an appeal from a decision, but a

review of the manner in which the decision was made.

The full speech of Lord Brightman in the House of Lords

decision in Chief Constable of North Wales Police v. Evans159

makes it clear that the Court of Appeal (in England) had

originally taken the view that the Court sits in judgment not

only on the correctness of the decision-making process but also

on the correctness of the decision itself. Lord Brightman,

considering the appeal in the House of Lords, did not agree with

the position of the Court of Appeal.

158 CA/WRIT/399/2019, CA Minutes of 20.11.2019. 159 [1982] 1 WLR 1155.

93

I turn secondly to the proper purpose of the remedy of

judicial review, what it is and what it is not. In my opinion

the law was correctly stated in the speech of Lord Evershed

in Ridge v. Baldwin 1964 AC 40 at page 96. His was a

dissenting judgment but the dissent was not concerned

with this point. Lord Evershed referred to a danger of

usurpation of power on the part of the courtsunder the

pretext of having regard to the principles of natural justice.

He added: I do observe again that it is not the decision as

such which is liable to review; it is only the circumstances

in which the decision was reached, and particularly in such

a case as the present the need for giving to the party

dismissed an opportunity for putting his case.

Judicial review is concerned, not with the decision, but with

the decision-making process. Unless that restriction on the

power of the court is observed, the court will in my view,

under the guise of preventing the abuse of power, be itself

guilty of usurping power.

I leave these preliminary observations in order to consider

the judgments in the Court of Appeal. It was accepted by

each member of the court that the case fell within the third

of Lord Reids categories; that the respondent was entitled

to a fair hearing; and that he had not had one. However

Lord Denning M.R. added this: I go further. Not only must

he be given a fair hearing, but the decision itself must be

fair and reasonable. That is the protection afforded to every

servant who is employed under a contract of service. He is

94

protected against unfair dismissal. No less protection

should be afforded to a probationer constable.160

There is however a wider point than the injustice of the

decision-making process of the Chief Constable. With

profound respect to the Court of Appeal, I dissent from the

view that Not only must [the probationer constable] be

given a fair hearing, but the decision itself must be fair and

reasonable. If that statement of the law passed into

authority without comment, it would in my opinion

transform, and wrongly transform, the remedy of judicial

review. Judicial review, as the words imply, is not an

appeal from a decision, but a review of the manner in which

the decision was made. The statement of law which I have

quoted implies that the court sits in judgment not only on

the correctness of the decision-making process but also on

the correctness of the decision itself.161

Having said the above, it is interesting to note Lord Brightman

does expressly acknowledge other grounds of review, such as

unreasonableness, as identified in Associated Provincial Picture

Houses Ltd. v. Wednesbury Corporation,162 which necessarily

involves investigation of the merits of the matter.

In his printed case counsel for the appellant made this

submission: Where Parliament has entrusted to an

administrative authority the duty of making a decision

which affects the rights of an individual, the courts

160 At 1173. 161 At 1174. 162 [1948] 1 KB 223.

95

supervisory function on a judicial review of that decision is

limited. The court cannot be expected to possess knowledge

of the reasons of policy which lie behind the administrative

decision nor is it desirable that evidence should be called

before the court of the implications of such policy. It follows

that the court ought not to attempt to weigh the merits of the

particular decision but should confine its function to a

consideration of the manner in which the decision was

reached.

When the sole issue raised on an application for judicial

review is whether the rules of natural justice have been

observed, these propositions are unexceptionable. Other

considerations arise when an administrative decision is

attacked on the ground that it is vitiated by self-

misdirection, by taking account of irrelevant or neglecting to

take account of relevant factors, or is so manifestly

unreasonable that no reasonable authority, entrusted with

the power in question, could reasonably have made such a

decision. See the well known judgment of Lord Greene M.R.

in Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. v. Wednesbury

Corporation [1948] 1 KB 223.163 (emphasis added)

Particularly in reference to the paragraph quoted immediately

above, Wade has this to say:

Although it has been laid down in the House of Lords, and

repeated by other judges, that judicial review means

163 At 1174-1175.

96

review of the manner in which the decision was made,164

the context of this statement shows that it was not intended

to affect the established grounds of review which, as the

whole of this chapter illustrates, extend to the substance as

well as the manner of administrative decisions and acts.165

The above observation of Wade militates against the argument

that judicial review is concerned not with the decision, but with

the decision-making process.

Reasonableness deals with the substance of the matter whereas

natural justice deals with its procedure. In the words of Wade:

The principle of reasonableness has become one of the most

active and conspicuous among the doctrines which have

vitalized administrative law in recent years.Its

contribution to administrative law on the substantive side is

equal to that of the principles of natural justice on the

procedural side.166

Lord Greene MR in Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. v.

Wednesbury Corporation167 stressed unreasonableness as a

ground for judicial review.

It is true the discretion must be exercised reasonably. Now

what does that mean? Lawyers familiar with the

phraseology commonly used in relation to exercise of

164 Chief Constable of North Wales Police v. Evans [1982] 1 WLR 1155 at 1174 (Lord Brightman). Review for unreasonableness in the Wednesbury sense is expressly recognised. 165 H.W.R. Wade & C.F. Forsyth, Administrative Law, 9th Edition, p.344. 166 H.W.R. Wade & C.F. Forsyth, Administrative Law, 11th Edition, p.394. 167 [1948] 1 KB 223.

97

statutory discretions often use the word unreasonable in

a rather comprehensive sense. It has frequently been used

and is frequently used as a general description of the

things that must not be done. For instance, a person

entrusted with a discretion must, so to speak, direct himself

properly in law. He must call his own attention to the

matters which he is bound to consider. He must exclude

from his consideration matters which are irrelevant to what

he has to consider. If he does not obey those rules, he may

truly be said, and often is said, to be acting

unreasonably. Similarly, there may be something so

absurd that no sensible person could ever dream that it lay

within the powers of the authority. Warrington L.J. in Short

v. Poole Corporation [1926] Ch 66, 90, 91 gave the example

of the red-haired teacher, dismissed because she had red

hair. That is unreasonable in one sense. In another sense it

is taking into consideration extraneous matters. It is so

unreasonable that it might almost be described as being

done in bad faith; and, in fact, all these things run into one

another.168

The court is entitled to investigate the action of the local

authority with a view to seeing whether they have taken

into account matters which they ought not to take into

account, or, conversely, have refused to take into account or

neglected to take into account matters which they ought to

take into account. Once that question is answered in favour

of the local authority, it may be still possible to say that,

although the local authority have kept within the four

168 At 229.

98

corners of the matters which they ought to consider, they

have nevertheless come to a conclusion so unreasonable

that no reasonable authority could ever have come to it. In

such a case, again, I think the court can interfere. The

power of the court to interfere in each case is not as an

appellate authority to override a decision of the local

authority, but as a judicial authority which is concerned,

and concerned only, to see whether the local authority have

contravened the law by acting in excess of the powers

which Parliament has confided in them.169

De Smith accepts substantive review in English law has been

dominated by the concept of unreasonableness closely identified

with the famous formulation by Lord Greene MR in the

Wednesbury case.170

However much one takes pains to say the Courts are not

supposed to consider the merits of a decision in judicial review,

the reasonable or unreasonableness of a decision, for instance,

cannot be effectively assessed without going into the merits of

the case.

It is not practically possible to separate a right decision from a

lawful decision. A right decision is almost always a lawful

decision, and vice versa. Nor can a wrong decision be separated

from an unlawful decision. Likewise, a wrong decision is always

an unlawful decision, and vice versa.

169 At 233-234. 170 De Smiths Judicial Review, 8th Edition, p.597.

99

The above discussion goes to show that the argument or

proposition of law that in judicial review a Court is concerned

not with the merits of the casethat is, whether the decision is

right or wrongbut whether the decision is lawful or not, is no

longer valid in modern administrative law. I take the view that

certiorari does lie, if a tribunal has gone wrong on merits in

arriving at a decision. Therefore, I reject the argument of

learned ASG that the writ Court does not have jurisdiction to

look into the merits of the substantive application.

Before I part with this point, let me add the following. De Smith

states The rule of law has been a resilient and effective force

behind the general development of judicial review and In

practice, many of the decisions held unreasonable are so held

because they offend the values of the rule of law.171 By

strengthening the rule of law, the rights of all people are

protected, the arbitrary exercise of power is constricted and

democracy ensured. Weeramantry, observing that there has

been an increase in all manner of administrative authorities

vested with various special jurisdictions to deal with the rights

of subjects, states This new phenomenon has raised fears that

the administration may under cover of welfare legislation arrogate

to itself power over the rights and liberties of the citizen. This

problem has become acute in nearly all jurisdictions and has

promoted the growth of a large volume of new law by which all

manner of curbs and restraints are being placed upon such

authorities. The principle of judicial review of administrative

decisions is expanding and administrative law is likely to grow

171 De Smiths Judicial Review, 8th Edition, p.619.

100

into one of the most significant branches of law, protecting the

rights of the subject in the future.172 It is undeniable that the

frontiers of judicial review have expanded over the years and will

continue to grow under the aegis of judicial pronouncements.

The Courts have so far made great strides in this area. The

modern law of judicial review shall be guided by function rather

than form, and every endeavour shall be made to prevent

technicalities from impeding the growth of judicial review.

9. Applicability of the Evidence Ordinance to Courts Martial

Learned ASG in his written submission states Even in the

context of Sri Lanka S.2(1) of the Evidence Ordinance has

specifically excluded its applicability to Court Martials perhaps

due to the unique character of such tribunals. His position

appears to be that the said inapplicability of the Evidence

Ordinance to Courts Martial is related to the maintenance of

discipline among the Forces and the proper discharge of their

duties.173

Section 2(1) of the Evidence Ordinance of 1895174 which became

law on 01.01.1896 reads as follows:

This Ordinance shall apply to all judicial proceedings in or

before any court other than courts-martial, but not to

proceedings before an arbitrator.

172 C.G. Weeramantry, An Invitation to the Law, 1st Edition (1982), p.147. 173 Vide page 9 of the written submissions dated 27.01.2020. 174 No.14 of 1895, as amended.

101

Section 81 of the Air Force Act of 1949 which became law on

10.10.1950 reads as follows:

Subject to the other provisions of this Part, the rules of

evidence to be adopted in proceedings before a court

martial shall be the same as those followed in the civil

courts in Sri Lanka.

Further, Court Martial Regulations 66 and 67 made under

section 155 of the Air Force Act run as follows:

66. The court martial shall not receive evidence for the

prosecution which is not relevant to the facts stated in the

statement of particulars in the charge, or any evidence

which is not admissible according to the Evidence

Ordinance.

67. The rules of evidence adopted in civil courts in Ceylon

shall be followed by courts martial, and objections to any

question to a witness or to the admission of any evidence

may be made accordingly, and a person shall not be

required to answer any question or produce any document

which he could not be required to answer or produce in a

like proceeding before such civil court.

Although this matter (i.e. the applicability of the Evidence

Ordinance in Court Martial proceedings) was raised before the

Supreme Court in Sarath Fonseka v. Dhammika Kithulegoda,175

no ruling was given in this regard.

175 [2011] BLR 169.

102

But since the Supreme Court held in the said case that the

Court Martial is a competent Court capable of passing even the

death sentence, there cannot be any qualms in giving full effect

to section 81 of the Air Force Act and Court Martial Regulations

66 and 67. Justice demands it.

The language of section 81 of the Air Force Act and Court

Martial Regulations 66 and 67 is unambiguous. The intention of

the legislature is clear.

It is a canon of interpretation of statutes that if the provisions of

a later enactment are so inconsistent with or repugnant to the

provisions of an earlier one that the two cannot stand together,

the former is abrogated by the latter.176

The Court Martial cannot be given carte blanche to conduct

proceedings as it pleases in the name of maintaining discipline

among members of the forces. Discipline cannot be instilled by

indiscipline.

In view of the above, I hold that the Evidence Ordinance applies

to Court Martial proceedings.

10. Court Martial and Jury Trial

During the course of the argument, learned ASG stated that the

Court Martial is akin to trial by jury before the High Court. This

was stated when the second argument of learned Counsel for the

Petitioner was under consideration. It may be recalled that the

176 Maxwell on The Interpretation of Statutes, 12th Edition by P. St. J. Langan (2004), p.193.

103

second argument revolved around the interpretation of

Regulation 98. When the Court questioned whether provisions

similar to Regulation 98 are found in the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act177 with regard to Jury trials, learned ASG

answered in the negative, and thereafter did not, in my view,

pursue this argument.

However, learned ASG in his final written submissions makes

the same point in response to the 3rd ground of the

Petitioneri.e. failure to give reasons. He articulates his

argument in this way:

Finally, in this context the Respondent respectfully submits

that the Petitioner has submitted citing Sri Lankan judicial

authority that a Court Martial has been deemed to be a

court of law at least for some limited purposes and

therefore he had contended that a Court Martial must give

reasons for its finding. It is respectfully submitted that if

this contention is upheld jury trials held before High Courts

would have to be considered as not valid in law on the

ground that in such trials at the time the verdict of the jury

is returned no reasons whatsoever are given by the jurors.

In both situations i.e. Trial by Jury and Court Martials the

presiding judge or judge advocate would make summing up

addresses and the jurors or the members of the Court

Martial thereafter retire to consider its verdict. In the

Criminal Procedure Code there is no provision for members

of the jury to give reasons.

177 No.15 of 1979, as amended.

104

I am not inclined to agree with this line of argument.

It is apparent this argument has been made in passing. Learned

ASG does not support this argument with any provision of the

law or supporting authority. None of the Indian authorities cited

by him have held that there is no requirement for the Court

Martial to give reasons on the ground that it is comparable to

trial by jury.

It is expecting too much from the Court to study this idea and

come to a considered finding. Nevertheless, I undertook the task

to a certain extent, as this involves an important question of law.

Let me first meet the argument of learned ASG in situ. The only

point which learned ASG stresses in making a parallel between a

jury trial and Court Martial is In both situations i.e. Trial by Jury

and Court Martials the presiding judge or judge advocate would

make summing up addresses and the jurors or the members of

the Court Martial thereafter retire to consider its verdict. In other

words, it appears it is only because of the summing up address

and then retirement to consider the verdict in both situations

that learned ASG says a jury trial and Court Martial are

comparable.

This submission is unsustainable.

In terms of section 229 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act,

When the case for the defence and the prosecuting counsels

reply (if any) are concluded the Judge shall charge the jury

summing up the evidence and laying down the law by which the

jury are to be guided. This is mandatory on the part of the

105

Judge, without which the verdict of the jury will be struck down

on appeal at first sight without going into the merits. But,

interestingly, summing up is not an essential prerequisite of the

Court Martial.

In the first place, the appointment of a Judge Advocate is not

compulsory in all forms of Courts Martial. In terms of section

53 of the Air Force Act, the presence of a Judge Advocate seems

to be mandatory only in a General Court Martial, but optional in

a District Court Martial. It appears there is no such

requirement in a Field Court Martial.

Secondly, in terms of section 54(d) of the Air Force Act, summing

up by the Judge Advocate is not a must. It can be dispensed

with by mutual consent.

At the conclusion of the case he [the Judge Advocate] shall,

unless both he and the Court Martial consider it

unnecessary, sum up the evidence and advise the Court

Martial upon the law relating to the case before the Court

Martial proceeds to deliberate upon its finding.

This is reiterated in Regulation 65(1) of the Court Martial

Regulations.

The Judge-Advocate (if any) shall, unless he and the Court

Martial think a summing up unnecessary, sum up in open

court the whole case.

Retirement to consider the verdict is not a phenomenon peculiar

to a jury trial or Court Martial. It so happens in any Court

where a case is heard by more than one Judge.

106

On these grounds, although this Court can reject this argument

of learned ASG and move on to the next, if any, I will further

consider the matter for completeness.

As I will elaborate below, the members of the Court Martial are

more like a panel of Judges than jurors.

Is the Court Martial bound by the advice of the Judge Advocate,

as jurors are by the advice of the High Court Judge?

In terms of Regulation 95, the Court Martial shall be assisted by

the opinion of the Judge Advocate but can disregard his opinion

by giving reasons. It is the Court Martial, not the Judge

Advocate, which shall be responsible for the legality of its

decisions. Regulation 95 reads thus:

Upon any point of law or procedure which arises upon the

trial, the Court Martial shall be assisted by the opinion of

the Judge-Advocate which it shall not disregard except for

very weighty reasons. The Court Martial shall be

responsible for the legality of its decisions but it must

consider the consequences which may result from the

disregard of the advice of the Judge-Advocate. The Court

Martial may, in following the opinion of the Judge-Advocate,

record that it has decided in consequence of that opinion.

This view has been affirmed by this Court in Chandra Kumar v.

Capt. Samarawickrama,178 where the conviction and sentence by

a (Navy) Court Martial were quashed on the basis that the Judge

Advocate had in his summing up stated the Court Martial was

178 [2002] 2 Sri LR 153.

107

completely bound by his directions, whereas the relevant

provision did not so specify.179

The ruleclearly indicates that the Court need not

necessarily accept the directions of the Judge-Advocate on

points of law. It is open to the Court to take, on points of

law, a view different from that of the Judge-Advocate. In

such a case the Court has only to give reasons for not

accepting the advice of the Judge-Advocate.180

It is significant that the word used in Regulation 95 is opinion

and not direction.

The provisions as to the role of the Judge and jury at a trial by

jury in the High Court are set out in sections 230-232 of the

Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

At a trial by jury, the Judge gives directions to the jury which

the jury are bound to follow, as illustrated below, whether that

direction is right or wrong and whether they do or do not agree

with it. In terms of section 232(a) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act, for instance, It is the duty of the jury to decide

which view of the facts is true and then to return the verdict

which under such view ought according to the direction of the

Judge to be returned. Illustration (a) explains it thus:

A is tried for the murder of B.

179 The relevant section 21 of the Navy Order No. 0513 states "The Court shall be guided by the advice of the trial Judge-Advocate on all points of law. Where, however, the Court does not accept the advice on a point of law, it shall be the duty of the president to cause the fact to be set out in the record of the proceedings together with the Court's reasons for rejecting the advice". 180 [2002] 2 Sri LR 153 at 167.

108

It is the duty of the Judge to explain to the jury the

distinction between murder and culpable homicide not

amounting to murder and to tell them under what view of

the facts A ought to be convicted of murder or of culpable

homicide not amounting to murder or to be acquitted.

It is the duty of the jury to decide which view of the facts is

true and to return verdict in accordance with the direction of

the Judge, whether that direction is right or wrong and

whether they do or do not agree with it. (emphasis added)

The powers and duties of the Judge Advocate are set out in

section 54 of the Air Force Act.

54. The powers and duties of the officer appointed to be the

Judge-Advocate at a Court Martial shall be as follows:

a) It shall be his duty, whether before or during the

proceedings, to give advice on questions of law or

procedure relating to the charge or trial to the

prosecutor and to the accused, who are hereby

declared to be entitled to obtain such advice at any

time after his appointment;

Provided that during the proceedings he shall give

such advice with the prior permission of the Court

Martial.

b) It shall be his duty to invite the attention of the Court

Martial to any irregularity in the proceedings.

Whether or not he is consulted, he shall inform the

Court Martial and the authority convening the Court

109

Martial of any defect in the charge or in the

constitution of the Court Martial, and shall give his

advice on any matter before the Court Martial.

c) He shall take all such action as may be necessary to

ensure that the accused does not suffer any

disadvantage in consequence of any incapacity to

examine or cross-examine witnesses or to give

evidence clearly, and may for that purpose, with the

permission of the Court Martial question any witness

on any relevant matter.

d) At the conclusion of the case he shall, unless both he

and the Court Martial consider it unnecessary, sum

up the evidence and advise the Court Martial upon

the law relating to the case before the Court Martial

proceeds to deliberate upon its finding.

54(a) refers to advice to be given not to the Court Martial but to

the prosecutor and the accused, with the permission of the

Court Martial, if it is during the proceedings.

There is no compulsion for compliance by the Court Martial on

the matters referred to in 54(b).

54(c) allows the Judge Advocate to look after the interests of the

accused and, when necessary, with the permission of the Court

Martial, to question any witness.181

181 It appears to me that Regulation 79 is in conflict with section 54(c) of the Act, as the former suggests the Judge Advocate (like the President of the Court Martial) can question a witness without the permission of the Court Martial. Regulation 79 reads as follows: The president, the Judge-Advocate

110

But Regulation 19(3) casts a similar burden on the President of

the Court Martial to look after the interests of the accused. It

reads as follows:

It is the duty of the president to see that, justice is

administered, and that the accused has a fair trial, and

that he does not suffer any disadvantage in consequence of

his position as a person under trial or of his ignorance or of

his incapacity to examine or cross-examine witnesses or to

make his own evidence clear or intelligible, or otherwise.

Conversely, in a trial by jury, the duty of the Judge is far more

oneroushe is the one who conducts the trial, unlike the Judge

Advocate in the Court Martial. In the Court Martial, the

proceedings are conducted not by the Judge Advocate but by the

Court Martial presided over by its President.

Regulation 19(1) and (2) read as follows:

19(1) The members of the court martial shall take their

seats according to their Air Force or Army rank.

19(2) The president shall be responsible for the trial being

conducted in proper order, in accordance with the Air Force

Act, and in a manner befitting a court of justice.

Every procedural step of the Court Martial is taken not by the

Judge Advocate, but by the Court Martial collectively. The Court

(if any) and, with the permission of the court martial, any of its members may address a question to a witness while such witness is giving his evidence and before he withdraws. Upon such question being answered, the questioner may put to the witness any question arising out of the answer which he thinks fit or which he may be requested to put by the prosecutor or by or on behalf of the accused.

111

Martial as a unit presided over by its President discharges the

duties of a Judge in a trial by jury. To name a few of its duties,

the Court Martial can remand the accused for trial,182 the Court

Martial shall be satisfied that the Charge Sheet is in order,183

the Court Martial shall cause the accused to be brought before

it,184 the Court Martial shall allow great latitude to the accused

in making his defence and may caution the accused as to the

irrelevance of his defence,185 the Court Martial shall read the

charge to the accused,186 the accused can take up jurisdictional

objections before the Court Martial and the Court Martial shall

make a ruling on such objections,187 the Court Martial shall

record the plea of guilty or not guilty of the accused.188 This list

is not exhaustive.

To give another example, in terms of Regulation 60, at the end of

the prosecutions case, the accused can make an application to

the Court Martial (not to the Judge Advocate) not to call upon

his defence and to acquit him on the basis that no prima facie

case has been made against him. In such a situation, the Court

Martial can make a ruling. In terms of section 220 of the Code

of Criminal Procedure Act, at a trial by jury such an application

can only be made to the Judge, not to the jury.

This in itself demonstrates that the role of the Judge Advocate is

not comparable to that of the Judge at a trial by jury, and that

182 Regulation 16. 183 Regulation 21. 184 Regulation 22. 185 Regulation 25. 186 Regulation 37. 187 Regulation 46. 188 Regulations 47-56.

112

members of the Court Martial function as a panel of Judges in a

regular Court.

Furthermore, Where a Judge is not disposed to accept the

verdict of a Jury he is entitled to redirect them on the law as well

as on the facts of the case.189 If the jury is not agreeable, the

Judge can discharge the jury.

Sections 235 and 237 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act

read as follows:

235(1) Unless otherwise ordered by the Judge the jury shall

return a verdict on all the charges on which the accused is

tried and the Judge may ask them such questions as are

necessary to ascertain what their verdict is.

235(2) If the Judge does not approve of the verdict returned

by the Jury he may direct them to reconsider their verdict,

and the verdict given after such reconsideration shall be

deemed to be the true verdict.

237 If the jury or the required majority of them cannot agree

the Judge shall after lapse of such time as he thinks

reasonable discharge them.

Such sweeping powers, as in the above, have not been given to

the Judge Advocate.

At a trial by jury, the duty of the jurors ends with delivering the

verdict and, if the accused is found guilty, it is thereafter the

responsibility of the Judge in terms of section 238 of the Code of

189 The King v. Rajakaruna (1941) 42 NLR 337.

113

Criminal Procedure to forthwith pass judgement on him

according to law, which in practical terms refers to sentencing.

However, in Court Martial proceedings, after the accused is

found guilty, the Court Martial shall, according to Regulation

106, take evidence on factors to be considered in terms of

sentencing and exercise its authority under section 47 of the Act

in imposing punishment. According to sections 63 and 64 of the

Act, and Regulations 132, 133, 138 and 162, convictions and

sentences imposed by the Court Martial shall be subject to the

approval of the authority having power to confirm the same,

until which time the conviction and sentence shall not be valid.

Hence, unlike at a trial by jury where the verdict is given by the

jury and the sentence is passed by the Judge, both of which

shall stand unless overturned by a superior Court, the

conviction and sentence of a Court Martial are both passed

collectively by all members thereof and shall take effect only

upon the approval of the confirming authoritysuch authority

also having the power to refer the matter to the Court Martial for

revision or to alter the conviction and/or sentence.

In terms of Regulation 109, the sentence shall be signed by the

President of the Court Martial.

Upon the court martial awarding the sentence, the

president shall date and sign the sentence, and such

signature shall authenticate the whole of the proceedings,

and the proceedings, upon being signed by the Judge-

Advocate (if any), shall as soon as possible be transmitted

for confirmation.

114

The concept of trial by jury had at its inception the idea of trying

an offender by his peers, which gives credence to the system of

justice. Is this concept valid in proceedings before Courts

Martial? This question is posed to show that an attempt to draw

a parallel between a trial by jury and Court Martial cannot be

justifiable.

In terms of sections 46, 48 and 50 of the Air Force Act, it is the

responsibility of the convening officer to appoint the members of

the Court Martial. The convening officer also appoints the

President of the Court Martial. Regulations 2-10 are also

relevant in this regard. Perusal of these provisions show that a

Court Martial is constituted of senior officers of the Air Force.

Once appointed, the said officers participate in the proceedings

as part of their duties.

In Gunaseela v. Udugama (Major-General and Army

Commander),190 the Supreme Court observed:

A Court Martial is not a paid office; it is a body consisting of

Service Officers convened ad hoc for the trial of particular

cases, and the duty to serve as a member of such a Court is

only one of the several kinds of duties which a Service

Officer can under the relevant Statutes be called upon to

perform. The office which entitled an Army officer to pay

and other emoluments is his substantive office in the Army,

and service as a member of a Court Martial is no more the

basis of his entitlement to pay and emoluments than is his

service in any other duty which the Army Act requires him

190 (1966) 69 NLR 193 at 194.

115

to perform. A Court Martial bears no resemblance to a

Labour Tribunal established under the Industrial Disputes

Act.

The Indian case of Nirmal Lakra v. Union of India191 highlights

the distinction between jurors in criminal Courts and members

of Courts Martial in the following manner:

Even though it is pointed out that the procedure of trial by

Court Martial is almost analogous to the procedure of trial

in the ordinary criminal courts, we must recall what Justice

William O'Douglas observed: [T]hat civil trial is held in an

atmosphere conducive to the protection of individual rights

while a military trial is marked by the age-old manifest

destiny of retributive justice. Very expression Court Martial

generally strikes terror in the heart of the person to be tried

by it. And somehow or the other the trial is looked upon

with disfavor. In Reid v. Covert 1 L Ed 2D 1148: 354 US 1

(1957), justice Black observed at page 1174 as under:

Courts martial are typically ad hoc bodies appointed by a

military officer from among his subordinates. They have

always been subject to varying degrees of command

influence. In essence, these tribunals are simply executive

tribunals whose personnel are in the executive chain of

command. Frequently, the members of the Court Martial

must look to the appointing officer for promotions,

advantageous assignments and efficiency ratingsin short,

for their future progress in the service. Conceding to military

personnel that high degree of honesty and sense of justice

191 2003 (1) SLJ 151 Delhi.

116

which nearly all of them undoubtedly have, the members of

a Court Martial, in the nature of things, do not and cannot

have the independence of jurors drawn from the general

public or of civilian judges.

In terms of section 53 of the Air Force Act, the appointment of

the Judge Advocate is also the responsibility of the convening

authority. Section 53 of the Act reads as follows:

(1) The authority convening a general court martial shall,

and the authority convening a district court martial may,

appoint a person, who has sufficient knowledge of the

practice and procedure of courts martial and of the general

principles of law and of the rules of evidence, to act as

Judge-Advocate at the court martial.

(2) A person who, under subsection (2) of section 52, is

disqualified from sitting on a court Martial shall not be

appointed as Judge-Advocate at that court martial.

Regulation 20(3) states The court martial shall further, if a

Judge-Advocate has been appointed, ascertain that the Judge-

Advocate is duly appointed, and is not disqualified from acting at

that court martial. Needless to say, the jury have no such

prerogative vis--vis the Judge.

According to section 61(3) of the Act, in the absence of the Judge

Advocate, the Court Martial shall adjourn. According to

Regulation 169, in the absence of either the President or Judge

Advocate (if any) the Court Martial shall not proceed and, if

necessary, shall adjourn. The Judge Advocate and the President

117

of the Court Martial are given equal status in this regard. No

such parallel can be drawn between the Judge and the jury at a

trial by jury.

Regulation 166 makes the Judge Advocate part of closed Court

deliberations of the Court Martial. It says When a court martial

sits in closed court for any deliberation amongst the members or

otherwise, no person shall be present except the members, the

Judge-Advocate, and any officers under instruction. This is

different from the Judges detached position at a jury trial.

The aforesaid discussion points to the fact that the function of

members of a Court Martial is more akin to a panel of Judges

than jurors.

I am unable to accept the argument of learned ASG that Court

Martial proceedings and trial by jury before the High Court are

equivalent and therefore there is no requirement in law to give

reasons for the decisions of the former as in the latter.

11. Equal Protection of the Law

Members of the armed forces and the police are citizens of this

country. They are entitled to the equal protection of the law,

subject to certain limitations. Article 12(1) guarantees All

persons are equal before the law and are entitled to the equal

protection of the law.

I am aware of Article 15(8) of the Constitution which reads as

follows:

118

The exercise and operation of the fundamental rights

declared and recognized by Articles 12(1), 13 and 14 shall,

in their application to the members of the Armed Forces,

Police Force and other Forces charged with the maintenance

of public order, be subject to such restrictions as may be

prescribed by law in the interests of the proper discharge of

their duties and the maintenance of discipline among them.

The restrictions mentioned in Article 15(8) above shall not be

imaginary restrictions, but those prescribed by law. The law

has not prescribed that reasons need not be given for the

decisions of the Court Martial.

In Lt. Col. Prithi Pal Singh Bedi v. Union of India,192 the Supreme

Court of India observed:

Reluctance of the apex court more concerned with civil law

to interfere with the internal affairs of the Army is likely to

create a distorted picture in the minds of the military

personnel that persons subject to Army Act are not citizens

of India. It is one of the cardinal features of our Constitution

that a person by enlisting in or entering armed forces does

not cease to be a citizen so as to wholly deprive him of his

rights under the Constitution. More so when this Court held

in Sunil Batra v. Delhi Administration193 that even prisoners

deprived of personal liberty are not wholly denuded of their

fundamental rights. In the larger interest of national

security and military discipline Parliament in its wisdom

may restrict or abrogate such rights in their application to

192 1982 AIR 1413; 1983 SCR (1) 393. 193 1978 AIR 1675; 1979 SCR (1) 392.

119

the Armed Forces but this process should not be carried so

far as to create a class of citizens not entitled to the benefits

of the liberal spirit of the Constitution.

The oft-quoted dicta of Lord Hewart C.J. in Rex v. Sussex

Justices, Ex parte McCarthy194 is worth repeating:

It is not merely of some importance but is of fundamental

importance that justice should not only be done, but should

manifestly and undoubtedly be seen to be done.

This shall be equally applicable to proceedings before the Court

Martial, where high ranking officers of the armed forces, formed

as a body, decide the fate of the accused who is lower in rank, as

part of their official duties as servicemen. In this process,

matters such as hierarchical subjugation and subordination are

inevitable. In the case at hand, for instance, the defending

officer of the accused was an officer of the Air Force below the

rank of the President of the Court Martial.

One facet of the rule of law is the right to a fair trial.195

Article 10 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR)

states Everyone is entitled in full equality to a fair and public

hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal, in the

determination of his rights and obligations and of any criminal

charge against him. Sri Lanka ratified the UDHR in 1955.

194 [1924] 1 KB 256 at 259. 195 C.G. Weeramantry, Law: The Threatened Peripheries, 1st Edition (1984), p.24.

120

Article 13(4) of the Constitution declares No person shall be

punished with death or imprisonment except by order of a

competent court, made in accordance with procedure established

by law. Procedure established by law encapsulates within its

orbit reasons for decisions as a requirement of the law,

particularly when, I stress, a man is convicted of murder and

punished with the death sentence or life imprisonment.

In the instant case, it is admitted that investigations into this

incident were carried out simultaneously by the civilian police

and military police. After his conviction by Court Martial, the

Petitioner was summoned before the High Court to be tried upon

an indictment. It was at this juncture that the Petitioner

informed the High Court he had already been convicted by Court

Martial. It is not clear who decides the forum before which the

accused shall be tried. It is undeniable that had the Petitioner

been tried before the High Court, instead of by Court Martial, he

would have been in a more favourable position to defend

himself.

12. Conclusion

Admittedly, no opinion has been given by each member of the

Court Martial as to the finding of guilt of the Petitioner for

murder, either in open Court or closed Court. This is a grave

violation of mandatory provisions in Regulation 98 read with 175

of the Air Force Court Martial Regulations. It is incurable and

fatal to the conviction.

121

The giving of reasons for a decision of the Court Martial has not

been excluded expressly or by necessary implication in the Air

Force Act or Regulations made thereunder. Hence, the failure to

give reasons is fatal to the conviction of murder and punishment

of life imprisonment in the instant case.

The Petitioner succeeds on the second and third grounds of

argument.

Accordingly, I hold that the decision of the Court Martial to

convict the Petitioner for murder and the sentence of life

imprisonment passed on the Petitioner are illegal and a nullity.

I quash both the conviction and the sentence196 by way of

certiorari.

I make no order as to costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

196 This is reflected on page 1 of the Court Martial proceedings dated 15.12.2010, and the document marked R6 dated 29.12.2010 tendered by the Respondents with their statement of objections.