==== BLOCKS ==== 

CPA/0084/2019

Page 1 of 25

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for

revision under and in terms of Article

138 of the Constitution read with Article

154 P (6) of the Constitution and the

High Court of the Provinces (Special

Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990.

D.M.S. DISANAYAKE,

Commissioner of Labour (Industrial

Relations) Department of Labour,

Labour Secretariat, Colombo 05.

Complainant

Vs

AUGUSTUS ARSAKONE JESUDASAN,

Managing Director,

Devon Organisation Pvt Ltd. 190C Ihala

Yagoda,

Gampaha.

Accused

And

AUGUSTUS ARSAKONE JESUDASAN,

Managing Director,

Devon Organisation Pvt Ltd. 190C Ihala

Yagoda, Gampaha.

Accused-Petitioner

Vs

Court of Appeal Case No: CA(CPA) 0084/2019 Case No. HC Gampaha Revision 35/17 MC Gampaha Case No: 55300/10/LB

CPA/0084/2019

Page 2 of 25

D.M.S. DISANAYAKE,

Commissioner of Labour (Industrial

Relations),

Department of Labour,

Labour Secretariat,

Colombo 05.

Complainant-Respondent

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent

And Now Between

AUGUSTUS ARSAKONE JESUDASAN,

Managing Director,

Devon

Organisation Pvt Ltd. 190C,

Ihala Yagoda, Gampaha.

and now residing at, No. 90/96 (107C),

Kalugalawaththa,

Katugasthota.

Accused-Petitioner-Petitioner

Vs

D.M.S. DISANAYAKE,

Commissioner of Labour (Industrial

Relations),

Department of Labour,

Labour Secretariat,

Colombo 05.

Complainant-Respondent-Respondent

CPA/0084/2019

Page 3 of 25

HON. ATTORNEY GENERAL,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12

Respondent-Respondent

Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J.

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Counsel : Himalee Kularathna for the Accused-

Petitioner-Petitioner.

Abigail Jayakody, S.C. for the

Complainant-Respondent-Respondent

and Respondent-Respondent.

Written Submissions

of the Accused

-Petitioner-Petitioner

Tendered on : 23.03.2026

Written Submissions

of the Complainant-

Respondent-Respondent

and Respondent tendered on : 06.02.2026

Decided on : 27.03.2026

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Instant application in revision has been preferred to this Court by the

Accused-Petitioner-Petitioner (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the

Petitioner”) seeking inter-alia, to revise and set aside the order dated

10.05.2019, made by the learned High Court Judge of the Western Province

holden in Gampaha (hereinafter called and referred to as “the learned High

Court Judge”) in an application in revision bearing No. 35/2017 ප්‍රති in the

exercise of the revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154P(3)(b) of the

CPA/0084/2019

Page 4 of 25

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (hereinafter

called and referred to as ‘the Constitution”) to be read with Article 138 of the

Constitution, a certified copy of which was annexed to the petition furnished

to this Court by Petitioner marked as P3 (hereinafter called and referred to as

‘the HC order”) wherein, the learned High Court Judge had dismissed an

application in revision preferred to it by the Petitioner seeking to revise and

set aside the order of conviction and sentence imposed on the Petitioner dated

31.03.2017 made by the learned Magistrate of Gampaha in case bearing

No.55300/2010/LB.

The instant application in revision arises from the HC order made by the

learned High Court Judge in the exercise of the revisionary jurisdiction vested

in it by Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution to be read with Article 138 of the

Constitution and it was constantly, held by this Court that this Court has in

such circumstances, no jurisdiction to hear and determine an application in

revision arising from an order made of a Provincial High Court in the exercise

of the revisionary jurisdiction vested in it as enumerated above, and in the

result, this Court has afforded an opportunity for both parties to file written

submissions on the jurisdictional issue and accordingly, the written

submissions were filed by both the parties and today this matter comes on

before us for order on the jurisdictional issue.

In dealing with the jurisdictional objection, the pivotal question that would

arise for our consideration is whether this Court can exercise its extra-

ordinary revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by Article 138 of the

Constitution in relation to an order made by a High Court of the Province

established under Article 154P of the constitution enacted by the 13th

Amendment in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction under and in

terms of Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution to be read with Article 138

thereof. [Emphasis is mine]

It may now, be examined.

Before the 13th Amendment, Article 138 of the Constitution read thus;

CPA/0084/2019

Page 5 of 25

“The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise subject to the provisions

of the Constitution or of any law, an appellate jurisdiction for the

correction of all errors in fact or in law which shall be committed by

any Court of First Instance, tribunal or other institution and sole

and exclusive cognizance, by way of appeal, revision and restitutio in

integrum, of all causes, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things

of which such Court of First Instance, tribunal or other institution may

have taken cognizance:” [Emphasis is mine]

Proviso-not reproduced.

In the light of the Article 138 of the Constitution as it existed before the 13th

Amendment, appellate and revisionary jurisdiction was solely, and

exclusively, vested with the Court of Appeal (Vide-Weragama v. Eksath

Lanka Wathu Kamkam Samithiya and Others 1994[1] SLR 329, at page

295). [Emphasis is mine]

After the 13th Amendment, Article 138 of the Constitution now, reads thus;

“(1)The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise subject to the

provisions of the Constitution or of any law, an appellate jurisdiction

for the correction of all errors in fact or in law which shall be

[committed by the High Court, in the exercise of its appellate or

original jurisdiction or by any Court of First Instance], tribunal or

other institution and sole and exclusive cognizance, by way of appeal,

revision and restitutio in integrum, of all causes, suits, actions,

prosecutions, matters and things [of which such High Court, Court of

First Instance], tribunal or other institution may have taken

cognizance:” [Emphasis is mine]

Proviso-not reproduced

(2)-not reproduced.

Hence, Article 138 of the Constitution was amended by the Thirteenth

Amendment to the Constitution by the substitution for the words “committed

by any Court of First Instance” of the words “committed by the High Court

CPA/0084/2019

Page 6 of 25

in the exercise of its appellate or original jurisdiction or by any Court of

First Instance.”[Emphasis is mine]

The Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution enacted Article 154P(1) to the

Constitution and it reads thus;

“There shall be a High Court for each Province with effect from the date

on which this Chapter comes into force. Each such High Court shall be

designated as the High Court of the relevant Province.”

Article 154P(1) of the Constitution so enacted by the Thirteenth Amendment,

made provisions for the establishment of the High Courts in the provinces.

Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution enacted by the Thirteenth Amendment

to the Constitution, reads thus;

“Every such High Court shall –

(b) notwithstanding anything in Article 138 and subject to any law,

exercise, appellate and revisionary jurisdiction in respect of convictions,

sentences and orders entered or imposed by Magistrates Courts and

Primary Courts within the Province;” [Emphasis is mine]

Hence, Article 154P(3)(b) conferred upon the High Court so established under

Article 154P(1) the appellate and revisionary jurisdiction in respect of

convictions, sentences and orders entered or imposed by Magistrates

Courts and Primary Courts within the Province notwithstanding

anything in Article 138 and subject to any law. [Emphasis is mine]

Article 154P(6) of the Constitution enacted by Thirteenth Amendment to the

Constitution confers upon any person aggrieved by a final order, judgment or

sentence of any such High Court so established under Article 154P(1) of the

Constitution made in the exercise of its jurisdiction under paragraphs (3)(b)

or (3)(c) or (4) a right of appeal to the Court of Appeal in accordance with

Article 138 of the Constitution subject to the provisions of the Constitution

and any law and it reads thus;

CPA/0084/2019

Page 7 of 25

“(6) subject to the provisions of the Constitution and any law, any

person aggrieved by a final order, judgment or sentence of any such

Court, in the exercise of its jurisdiction under paragraphs (3)(b) or (3)(c)

or (4) may appeal there from to the Court of Appeal in accordance with

Article 138.” [Emphasis is mine]

Nonetheless, no provision was made with regard to the procedure to be

followed in such High Courts. With a view to providing for the lacuna in the

law with regard to the procedure to be followed in the High Court of the

Provinces, so established under Article 154P(1) of the Constitution which

enacted by the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution, the High Court of

the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990 (hereinafter called and

referred to as ‘the Act”) was enacted making provision “regarding the

procedure to be followed in, and the right to appeal to, and from, the High

Court established under Article 154P of the Constitution”.

The Act also made provision for the appeals to be brought in before the Court

of Appeal as well as the Supreme Court from the High Court. While section 9

of the Act provides for the appeals to Supreme Court from High Court, section

11 thereof provides for appeals to Court of Appeal from the High Court

established under Article 154P of the Constitution.

Section 9 of the Act reads thus;

“9. Subject to the provisions of this Act or any other law, any person

aggrieved by

(a) a final order, judgment, decree or sentence of a High Court

established by Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise of the

appellate jurisdiction vested in it by paragraph (3) (b) of Article 154P of

the Constitution or section 3 of this Act or any other law, in any matter

or proceeding whether civil or criminal which involves a substantial

question of law, may appeal therefrom to the Supreme Court if the High

Court grants leave to appeal to the Supreme Court ex mero motu or at

the instance of any aggrieved party to such matter or proceedings :

CPA/0084/2019

Page 8 of 25

Provided that the Supreme Court may, in its discretion, grant special

leave to appeal to the Supreme Court from any final or interlocutory

order, judgment, decree or sentence made by such High Court, in the

exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by paragraph (3) (b) of

Article 154P of the Constitution or section 3 of this Act, or any other

law where such High Court has refused to grant leave to appeal to the

Supreme Court, or where in the opinion of the Supreme Court, the case

or matter is fit for review by the Supreme Court:

Provided further that the Supreme Court shall grant leave to appeal in

every matter or proceeding in which it is satisfied that the question to

be decided is of public or general importance; and

(b) a final order, judgment or sentence of a High Court established by

Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise of its jurisdiction

conferred on it by paragraph (3) (a), or (4) of Article 154P of the

Constitution may appeal therefrom to the Court of Appeal.”

Section 11 of the Act reads thus;

“(1) The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise, subject to the

provisions of this Act or any other law, an appellate jurisdiction for the

correction of all errors in fact or in law which shall be committed by any

High Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution in the

exercise of its jurisdiction under paragraph (3) (a), or (4) of Article 154P

of the Constitution and sole and exclusive cognizance by way of appeal,

revision and restitutio in integrum of all causes, suits, actions,

prosecutions, matters and things of which such High Court may have

taken cognizance :

Provided that, no judgment, decree or order of any such High Court,

shall be reversed or varied on account of any error, defect, or

irregularity which has not prejudiced the substantial rights of the

parties or occasioned a failure of justice.

CPA/0084/2019

Page 9 of 25

(2) The Court of Appeal may in the exercise of its jurisdiction, affirm,

reverse, correct or modify any order, judgment, decree or sentence

according to law or it may give directions to any High Court established

by Article 154P of the Constitution or order a new trial or further

hearing upon such terms as the Court of Appeal shall think fit.

(3) The Court of Appeal may farther receive and admit new evidence

additional to, or supplementary of, the evidence already taken in any

High Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution touching the

matters at issue in any original case, suit, prosecution or action, as the

justice of the case may require.”

Section 10 of the Act deals with the powers of the Supreme Court on appeal

and it reads thus;

“(1) The Supreme Court shall, subject to the Constitution be the final

Court of appellate jurisdiction within Sri Lanka for the correction of all

errors in fact or in law which shall he committed by a High Court

established by Article 154P of the Constitution, in the exercise of the

appellate jurisdiction vested in it by paragraph (3) (b) of Article 154P of

the Constitution or section 3 of this Act, or any other law and the

judgments and orders of the Supreme Court shall, in such cases, be

final and conclusive in all such matters.

(2) The Supreme Court shall, in the exercise of its jurisdiction, have sole

and exclusive cognizance by way of appeal from any order, judgment,

decree or sentence made by a High Court established by Article 154P of

the Constitution, in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in

such High Court by paragraph (3) (b) of Article 154P of the Constitution

or section 3 of this Act or any other law and it may affirm, reverse or

vary any such order, judgment, decree or sentence of such High Court

and may issue such directions to such High Court or Court of First

Instance or order a new trial or further hearing in any proceedings as

the may require and may also shall for and admit fresh or additional

evidence if the interests of justice so demands and may in such event,

CPA/0084/2019

Page 10 of 25

direct that such evidence be recorded by such High Court, or any Court

of First Instance.”

Both sections 5 and 12 of the Act would in my opinion, be significantly,

important for the proper resolution of the jurisdictional objection raised before

us and therefore, it would for clarity and convenience, be useful to reproduce

both of them verbatim the same as follows;

Section 5 of the Act makes provisions for the procedure for appealing to High

Court so established under Article 154P(1) of the Constitution and it reads

thus;

“The Provisions of written law applicable to appeals to the Court of Appeal,

from convictions, sentences or orders entered or imposed by a Magistrate's

Court, and to applications made to the Court of Appeal for revision of any

such conviction, sentence or order shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to appeals

to the High Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution for a

Province, from convictions, sentences or orders entered or imposed by

Magistrate's Courts, Primary Courts and Labour Tribunals within that

Province and from orders made under section 5 or section 9 of the Agrarian

Services Act, No. 58 of 1979, in respect of land situated within that Province

and to applications made to such High Court, for revision of any such

conviction, sentence or order.”

Section 12 of the Act makes provisions where appeal or application in

respect of same matter is filed in Court of Appeal and in High Court and

it reads thus;

“(a) Where any appeal or application is field in the Court of Appeal and

an appeal or application in respect of the same matter has been filed in

a High Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution invoking

jurisdiction vested in that Court by paragraph (3) (b) or (4) of Article

154P of the Constitution, within the time allowed for the filing of such

appeal or application, and the hearing of such appeal or application by

such High Court has not commenced, the Court of Appeal may proceed

to hear and determine such appeal or application or where it considers

CPA/0084/2019

Page 11 of 25

it expedient to do so, direct such High Court to hear and determine

such appeal or application:

Provided, however, that where any appeal or application which is within

the jurisdiction of a High Court established by Article 154P of the

Constitution is filed in the Court of Appeal, the Court of Appeal may if

it considers it expedient to do so, order that such appeal or application

be transferred to such High Court and such High Court shall hear and

determine such appeal or application.

(b) Where the Court of Appeal decides to hear and determine any such

appeal or application, as provided for in paragraph (a), the proceedings

pending in the High Court shall stand removed to the Court of Appeal

for its determination.

(c) No appeal shall lie from the decision of the Court of Appeal under

this section to hear and determine such appeal or application or to

transfer it to a High Court.

(d) Nothing in the preceding provisions of this section shall be read and

construed as empowering the Court of Appeal to direct a High Court

established by Article 154P of the Constitution to hear and determine

any appeal preferred to the Court of Appeal from an order made by such

High Court in the exercise of the jurisdiction conferred on it by

paragraph (4) of Article 154P of the Constitution.” [Emphasis is mine]

Upon a plain reading of Article 138 of the Constitution as amended, Article

154P(1), Article 154P(3)(b), and Article 154P(6) in conjunction with sections 5

and 12 of the Act, it makes it abundantly, clear that both Courts namely;

the Court of Appeal as well as the High Court established by Article

154P(1) of the Constitution which enacted by the Thirteenth

Amendment to the Constitution, now, enjoy and exercise concurrent or

parallel or coordinate appellate and revisionary jurisdiction on matters

referred to in Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution as quoted above

which the Court of Appeal otherwise, had solely, and exclusively, exercised

CPA/0084/2019

Page 12 of 25

before the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution. [Emphasis is

mine]

In the circumstances, I am of the view that the revisionary jurisdiction that

was solely, and exclusively, vested with the Court of Appeal before the

Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution, would after Thirteenth

Amendment to the Constitution, now, be exercised by a High Court

established by Article 154P(1) of the Constitution which enacted by the

Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution, concurrently or parallel or

coordinately with the Court of Appeal.

The view taken by me as aforesaid is fortified and well supported by a plethora

of authorities of the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal and they may

now, be examined.

Supreme Court in dealing with the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution

and the Provincial Councils bill, had determined on page 323(In RE

Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution and the Provincial Councils

Bill-1987 [2] SLR 312) as follows;

“The Bills do not effect any change in the structure of the Courts or

judicial power of the People. The Supreme Court and the Court of

Appeal continue to exercise unimpaired the several jurisdictions vested

in them by the Constitution. There is only one Supreme Court and one

Court of Appeal for the whole Island, unlike in a Federal State. “The

13th Amendment Bill only seeks to give jurisdictions in respect of writs

of Habeas Corpus in respect of persons illegally detained within the

Province and Writs of Certiorari, Mandamus and Prohibition against

any person exercising within the Province any power under any law or

statute made by the Provincial Council in respect of any matter in the

Provincial Council list and appellate jurisdiction in respect of

convictions ‘and sentences by Magistrate’s Courts and Primary

Courts within the Province to the High Court of the Province,

without prejudice to the executing jurisdiction of the Court of

Appeal. Vesting of this additional jurisdiction in the High Court of

CPA/0084/2019

Page 13 of 25

each Province only brings justice nearer home to the citizen and

reduces delay and cost of ligation. The power of appointment of

Judges of the High Court remains with the President and the power of

nominating them to the several High Courts remains with the Chief

Justice. The appointment, transfer, dismissal continue to be vested in

the Judicial Service Commission. Thus, the centre continues to be

supreme in the judicial area and the Provincial Council has no control

over the judiciary functioning in the Province.” [Emphasis is mine]

The question before Court in Abeywardene vs. Ajith de Silva 1998[1] SLR

134-a bench of five judges of the Supreme Court was whether a direct

appeal lies to this court from an order of the High Court in the exercise

of its revisionary jurisdiction without first preferring an appeal to the

Court of Appeal, wherein, Supreme Court had on page 137, inter-alia, held

that, “After the 13th Amendment, section 5 of the High Court of the

Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 read with Article 154P

(3)(b) of the Constitution (enacted by the 13th Amendment) entitled him

to file such application in the High Court of the province. The

jurisdiction of the High Court in the matter is concurrent. In Re the 13th

Amendment to the Constitution. In the result, he may file an application

in the Court of Appeal or in the High Court.”[Emphasis is mine]

It was inter-alia, held by the Supreme Court in Gunaratne v.

Thambinayagam and Others 1993 [2] SLR 355 at pages 357 and 358, which

was cited with approval by a bench of five judges of the Supreme Court in

Abeywardene vs. Ajith de Silva(Supra), that, “In each of these cases a

dispute relating to land had been referred to a Magistrate (exercising the

powers of the Primary Court) in terms of S. 66 (1) (b) of the Primary Courts

Procedure Act No. 44 of 1979. After due inquiry, the Magistrate made his

determination, the object of which is to maintain the status quo until final

adjudication of the rights in a civil suit. S. 74 (2) of the Act provides that an

appeal shall not lie against such determination. Prior to the 13th

Amendment to the Constitution, a party aggrieved with such a

determination used to apply to the Court of Appeal to have it set aside

CPA/0084/2019

Page 14 of 25

by way of revision in the exercise of the power of that Court under Article

138 of the Constitution read with Article 154. S. 5 of the High Court of

the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990 read with Article

154 P (3) (b) of the Constitution (enacted by the 13th Amendment)

entitled him to file such application in the High Court of the Province.

The jurisdiction of the High Court in the matter is concurrent. In Re the

Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution. In the result, he may file his

application in the Court of Appeal or in the High Court……S. 12 of Act

No. 19 of 1990 makes provision for resolving some of the anomalies

arising by reason of the provisions of Article 154P which vested new

jurisdictions in the High Court, but concurrently with the existing

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal in the same sphere.”. [Emphasis is

mine]

It was further held by Court in the decision in Gunaratne v. Thambinayagam

and Others (Supra) at page 362 that, “(a) that in the light of the concurrent

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal and the High Court which still exists,

which fact is confirmed by S. 12 of Act No. 19/1990, the identical

dispute may be decided by the Court of Appeal or by the High Court. A

decision in the High Court would permit two appeals whilst a decision in the

Court of Appeal would permit one more appeal;” [Emphasis is mine]

It was inter-alia, held by Supreme Court in Weragama v. Eksath Lanka

Wathu Kamkam Samithiya and others (Supra) at page 296 that, “These

amendments affected the appellate, revisionary and writ jurisdiction of the

Court of Appeal only in two respects. Firstly, Article 154P (3) (b) conferred

appellate and revisionary jurisdiction (but not writ jurisdiction) in respect of

Magistrate’s Courts and Primary Courts (but not Labour Tribunals, or other

courts and tribunals); this was “notwithstanding anything in Article 138” (and

that Article was in any event “subject to the provisions of the Constitution"),

and so either the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal was pro tanto

transferred to the High Courts or the Court of Appeal and the High Courts

had concurrent jurisdiction.” [Emphasis is mine]

CPA/0084/2019

Page 15 of 25

It was further held at pages 299 and 300 that, “….However, the jurisdiction

of the Court of Appeal under Article 138 is not an entrenched jurisdiction,

because Article 138 provides that it is subject to the provisions “of any law";

hence it was always constitutionally permissible for that jurisdiction to be

reduced or transferred by ordinary law (of course, to a body entitled to exercise

judicial power). That is the reason why I held (in Swastika Textile Industries

Ltd. v. Dayaratne, that section 3 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special

Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990, conferred concurrent, appellate and

revisionary jurisdiction on the High Courts in respect of Labour Tribunals,

and that thereafter section 31D3 of the Industrial Disputes Act, as amended

by Act No. 32 of 1990, made that jurisdiction exclusive, thereby taking away

the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal in that respect).

It was inter-alia, held by the Supreme Court in SC/Appeal/65/2025-Decided

on 10.10.2025 at page 32 that, “In this context, it would be legally

impermissible and institutionally unsound for the Court of Appeal, in pari

materia, to sit in appeal over judgments and orders pronounced by a

Provincial High Court in the exercise of its appellate or revisionary

jurisdiction. A party cannot pursue successive appeals before two courts of

coordinate jurisdiction in respect of the same matter. This strikes at the very

root of the issue. Such a practice is inimical to legislative intent, imposes

unnecessary burdens on the judicial system, and undermines the principle of

finality in litigation. These considerations make clear that concurrent

jurisdiction was intended to provide an alternative forum for appellate review,

not to create an additional tier in the appellate hierarchy.”.

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in Ramalingam Vs. Parameswary and

Others 2000 [2] SLR 340 at pages 347 and 348 that, “It is to be noted that

the power given under Article 138 of the Constitution to the Court of Appeal

to hear and determine applications in revision against orders made by Primary

Courts was not in any way taken away by either the Thirteenth Amendment

or Act No. 19 of 1990. In effect both Courts were conferred concurrent

jurisdiction in respect of these matters……Further, the alleged equation of

a Superior Appellate Court to the High Court of a Province need not be

CPA/0084/2019

Page 16 of 25

considered demeaning or debasing. The whole purpose of the Thirteenth

Amendment establishing a High Court in every province was to confer

jurisdiction in respect of certain matters in the High Court granting it

concurrent jurisdiction with the Court of Appeal. When concurrent or

parallel jurisdiction is given by Law to two Courts the question of a

superior and inferior Court would not arise. As far as the jurisdiction

granted to the two Courts in certain matters goes, they are

equal……”[Emphasis is mine]

In Sharif and Others Vs. Wickramasuriya and Others 2010 [1] SLR 255, it

was inter-alia, held by this Court at pages 265, 268 and 269 that, “It is thus

clear that both Courts enjoy concurrent jurisdiction on matters referred

to in Article 154P (3)(b). The jurisdiction enjoyed by the Court of Appeal

had not been disturbed by Articles of the Constitution or by the Acts of

Parliament…..Thus both Courts enjoy concurrent jurisdiction with

regard to judgments and orders of the Magistrate/Primary Courts and

District Courts. The powers enjoyed by the Court of Appeal had been

given to the High Court of the Provinces to facilitate the litigants in the

provinces and also to reduce the work load of the Court of Appeal.”.

[Emphasis is mine]

In Seylan Bank PLC v. Christobel Daniels (CA/PHC/APN/58/2014, CA

Minutes of 14.12.2016), it was inter-alia, that “The structure of Article 138

would also prevent this Court exercising revisionary jurisdiction when the sole

and exclusive jurisdiction has been vested in the Supreme Court. The

revisionary jurisdiction is bestowed in the Court of Appeal thus in Article 138

of the Constitution. “.....and sole and exclusive cognizance by way of

appeal, revision and restitutio in integrum, of all causes, suits, actions,

prosecutions, matters and things which such High Court, Court of First

Instance, tribunal or other institution may have taken cognizance”. It is

crystal clear beyond any scintilla of doubt that the revisionary power of

this Court lies only against orders made by such High Court, Court of

First Instance, tribunal or other institution when they have taken

cognizance of causes, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things.

CPA/0084/2019

Page 17 of 25

The words “such High Court, Court of First Instance, tribunal or other

institution” must be read ejusdem generis and such collocation of words

read together with the words causes, suits, actions, prosecutions,

matters and things clearly indicates that these Courts exercise original

jurisdiction. Only when the High Court of First Instance, tribunal or

other institution has exercised original jurisdiction, revision lies to this

court. In other words, only when the High Court has exercised original

jurisdiction, the revisionary jurisdiction of this Court can be invoked. In

my view Article 138 intentionally suggests such a deliberate intendment

of Parliament and when the High Court has sat in its appellate

jurisdiction as has happened in this case, no revision lies to this Court.”

[Emphasis is mine]

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA/MC/RE Application No. 04/2017-

Decided on 08.06.2018 at page 5 that, “The petitioner had filed revision

applications in Gampaha High Court seeking revision of the said orders made

by the learned magistrate and the said high court has dismissed the

applications. (Vide paragraph 8 of the petition). It must be noted that high

courts now exercised the same revisionary jurisdiction once this court

exercised over magistrate courts. As he has filed revision applications on

the same orders previously in the High Court of Gampaha he has

exhausted his remedy. His position is that his lawyers have not brought to

the notice of High Court the facts averred in this petition. A party to an

action cannot be given a chance to have a second bite of the same cherry.

If this court allows this application it may create a bad precedent to allow a

party who fails to present his case properly file another application.”

[Emphasis is mine]

In the decision in SC/Appeal/65/2025(Supra), the Supreme Court cited with

approval the following observations of this Court made by it in the case in

Malwatta v. Softlogic Finance PLC and Others (CA/CPA/152/2022, CA

Minutes of 31.08.2023). which inter alia, identified several practical

difficulties that would arise if the Court of Appeal were permitted to review

judgments and orders of the Provincial High Courts made in the exercise of

CPA/0084/2019

Page 18 of 25

their appellate jurisdiction. The said case concerned a party who, being

dissatisfied with a judgment of the Provincial High Court of Civil Appeal

delivered in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction, sought once again to

invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal against the judgment

of the Provincial High Court. In practical terms, this amounted to two

successive applications in revision being pursued in respect of the same

judgment of the District Court, although the second application was formally

directed against the judgment of the Provincial High Court as observed by the

Supreme Court in the said case in SC/Appeal/65/2025(Supra).

“Moreover, if litigants are allowed to file a revision application in the

Court of Appeal against a judgment or order given by the Provincial

High Court exercising revisionary jurisdiction it would lead to

unnecessary duplication of court proceedings. This could result in a

revision application being filed in the Court of Appeal while an appeal

is pending in the Supreme Court. It would also have the effect of the

Court of Appeal being given an opportunity to overrule a judgment of

the Supreme Court if the revision application is successful while the

appeal to the Supreme Court is not, which is an unintended absurdity.

is highly unlikely that Parliament or the legislative draftsmen intended

to manifestly complicate the appeal process when the Provincial High

Courts have been introduced to reduce and simplify the court process

not to complicate it even further. According to the legal maxim ‘Boni

judicis est lites dirimere, ne lis ex lite oritur, et interest republicae ut

sint fines litium’, it is the duty of a good judge to prevent litigations,

that suit may not grow out of suits, and it concerns the welfare of the

State that an end be put to litigation. It would be contrary to the practice

of a good judge to interpret statutes in a manner that would give rise to

unnecessary complications in the judicial process. I would also mention

here that allowing an appeal or a revision application from a judgment

or order from the Provincial High Court would also lead to, the Court of

Appeal having revisionary jurisdiction over an instance where the

Provincial High Court exercises its revisionary jurisdiction as is

CPA/0084/2019

Page 19 of 25

requested for in the instant case. In effect, the Court of Appeal would

lie in revision of a revision application. Seeing as Revisionary

jurisdiction is to be exercised in exceptional circumstances, allowing a

revision application on a revision application would be conceptually

contradictory to the spirit of a revision application. In the instant case,

for example, this court is invited to lie in revision of a revision

application filed in the Provincial High Court.”

It is in this backdrop of the case, I would think it expedient at this juncture

to examine the precise meaning assigned by the law dictionaries to the phrase

“concurrent jurisdiction”.

According to Black’s Law Dictionary-Eleventh Edition at page 1017,

concurrent jurisdiction is defined to mean as follows;

“1. Jurisdiction that might be exercised simultaneously by more than

one court over the same subject matter and within the same territory,

a litigant having the right to choose the court in which to file the action.

2. Jurisdiction shared by two or more states, esp. over the physical

boundaries (such as rivers or other bodies of water) between them. -

Also termed coordinate jurisdiction; overlapping jurisdiction.”

According to Wharton’s Law Lexicon-Fourteenth Edition at page 228,

concurrent jurisdiction is defined to mean as follows;

“Concurrent jurisdictions, the jurisdiction of several different tribunals,

both authorized to deal with the same subject-matter at the choice of

the suitor. In equity, the jurisdiction was concurrent where no complete

relief was obtainable at law. It was exercised in order to avoid circuity

of action or multiplicity of suits”

In the light of the definition assigned to the phrase “concurrent jurisdiction”

by law dictionaries as referred to above, “concurrent jurisdiction” means and

refers to jurisdiction that might be exercised simultaneously by more than

one court over the same subject matter and within the same territory, a

litigant having the right to choose the court in which to file the action.

CPA/0084/2019

Page 20 of 25

Let me then, examine the primary objective intended to be achieved by

conferring concurrent jurisdiction upon more than one Court over the same

subject matter with a litigant having the right to choose the court in which to

file the action. It is in my opinion, to avoid circuity of action or multiplicity of

suits with a view to preventing a wasteful or unnecessary legal process where

a party files multiple, separate lawsuits to resolve issues that could have been

dealt with in a single action, so that it may avoid waste of judicial resources

and unnecessary legal costs.

In my opinion, the cumulative effect of the provisions of Articles 138,

154P(3)(b), 154P(6) and sections 5 and 12 of the Act and of the authoritative

and biding judicial precedent cited above taken in conjunction with the

definition assigned to the phrase “concurrent jurisdiction”, is that when the

High Court established by Article 154P(1) of the Constitution (enacted by the

Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution) exercises revisionary jurisdiction,

it exercises revisionary jurisdiction hitherto exclusively, vested in the Court of

Appeal before the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution and therefore, it

exercises concurrent or parallel jurisdiction with the Court of Appeal; and

that, the High Court established by Article 154P(1) of the Constitution

(enacted by the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution) when it exercises

revisionary jurisdiction, is not subordinate to the Court of Appeal for; when

concurrent or parallel jurisdiction is conferred by law upon two Courts, the

question of a superior and inferior Court does not arise; and that, as far as

the jurisdiction granted to the two Courts in certain matters goes, they are

equal.

Upon a careful perusal of paragraph 13 of the written submission of the

Petitioner, it becomes manifest that the only objection raised by the Petitioner

to the jurisdictional objection is that it was belated and therefore, it could not

have been raised at a time when, the instant application in revision was set

down for argument and therefore, it should be overruled.

It may now, be examined.

CPA/0084/2019

Page 21 of 25

It appears that the jurisdictional objection has arisen long after the institution

of the instant application in revision before this Court and precisely, when it

was set down for argument.

However, in view of my findings as aforesaid, this Court does not have

revisionary jurisdiction vested in it in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution

in respect of an order of the Provincial High Court established by Article 154P

of the Constitution and made in the exercise of the revisionary jurisdiction

vested in it by sections 4,5 and 6 of the Act to be read with Articles 154P(3)(b)

and 138 of the Constitution. Hence, this Court suffers from a patent lack of

jurisdiction and therefore, this Court is subjected to a total want of, and/or

patent lack of jurisdiction to hear and determine the instant application in

revision.

It is trite law that a plea of total want of, and/or patent lack of jurisdiction

can be raised at any stage of the proceedings including for the first time in

appeal for; no amount of acquiescence, waiver or inaction will cure a such a

defect as parties cannot expressly, or impliedly, confer jurisdiction on a Court

where none exists-Vide-Perera Vs. Commissioner of National Housing 77

NLR 361, State Timber Corporation Vs. Moiz Goh Pte Ltd 2002 BALR 44,

Ittepana vs Hemawathie 1981 [1] SLR 476, Suriyaarachchi and Others

Vs. Liyanage and Another-CA Case No. 272/1997, CA Minutes of

08.06.2018 and JMC Jayasekara Management Centre (Pvt) Ltd Vs.

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue SC APPEAL No.05/2021-

Decided on 05.03.2025.

I would therefore, hold that the objection so raised to the jurisdictional

objection by the Petitioner on the premise as enumerated in paragraph 13 of

the written submissions of the Petitioner, is not entitled to succeed and as

such it should be rejected in-limine. (Vide-Perera Vs. Commissioner of

National Housing (Supra), State Timber Corporation Vs. Moiz Goh Pte Ltd

(Supra), Ittepana vs Hemawathie (Supra), Suriyaarachchi and Others Vs.

Liyanage and Another(Supra) and JMC Jayasekara Management Centre

(Pvt) Ltd Vs. Commissioner General of Inland Revenue (Supra)).

CPA/0084/2019

Page 22 of 25

Let me next examine the decision in SC/APPEAL No. 111/2015 Decided on

27.05.2020.

The question of law that arose for determination by the Supreme Court in the

decision in SC/APPEAL No. 111/2015(Supra) as manifest from paragraph 3

thereof, is as follows;

“Having failed to exercise the right to file an appeal in terms of Section

9 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of

1990 as amended, could a person invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of

the Court of Appeal referred to in Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Republic of Sri Lanka in order to canvass a decision made by a

Provincial High Court exercising its appellate powers?”

On the other hand, the jurisdictional objection came for its decision of this

Court is as follows;

“whether this Court can exercise its extra-ordinary revisionary

jurisdiction vested in it by Article 138 of the Constitution in

relation to an order made by a High Court of the Province

established under Article 154P of the constitution enacted by the

13th Amendment in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction

under and in terms of Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution to be

read with Article 138 thereof.” [Emphasis is mine]

Hence, it clearly, appears to me upon a careful scrutiny of the question of law

arose before the Supreme Court and this Court, the question of law that arose

for determination by this Court in the instant action is totally, different from

the question of law that arose for determination by the Supreme Court in the

decision in SC/APPEAL No. 111/2015(Supra) for; the question of law that

arose for our determination in this case is; whether this Court does have

jurisdiction to hear and determine the instant application in revision as

it emanates from a judgement given by the learned High Court Judge in

the exercise of its concurrent revisionary jurisdiction, whereas, the

question of law that arose for determination by the Supreme Court in the

CPA/0084/2019

Page 23 of 25

decision in SC/APPEAL No. 111/2015(Supra) is; Having failed to exercise

the right to file an appeal in terms of Section 9 of the Act, could a person

invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal referred to in

Article 138 of the Constitution of the Republic of Sri Lanka in order to

canvass a decision made by a Provincial High Court exercising its

appellate powers?. [Emphasis is mine]

Hence, I would hold that the facts and circumstances of the case in

SC/APPEAL No. 111/2015(Supra) can be clearly, distinguishable from the

facts and circumstances of the instant application and therefore, the decision

in SC/APPEAL No. 111/2015(Supra) has if I may say so with all due respect,

no bearing on the question of law arose before us in the instant application

for our determination.

There is another vital aspect of the jurisdictional objection which I think, I

should deal with before I would part with this judgment and it may now, be

examined.

It was emphatically, delineated by a bench of five judges of the Supreme Court

in Abeywardene vs. Ajith de Silva (Supra) at page 139 that, “The cumulative

effect of the provisions of Articles 154P (3)(b), 154P(6) and section 9 of Act No.

19 of 1990 is that, while there is a right of appeal to the Supreme Court from

the orders, etc., of the High Court established by Article 154P of the

Constitution in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by Article

154P (3) (b) or Section 3 of Act No. 19 of 1990 or any other law, there is no

right of appeal to the Supreme Court from the orders in the exercise of the

revisionary jurisdiction. An appeal from an order of the High Court in the

exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction should be made to the Court of Appeal.

An appeal to the Supreme Court from the decision of the Court of Appeal

would lie, with leave;” [Emphasis is mine]

It was further held by the bench of five judges of the Supreme Court in

Abeywardene vs. Ajith de Silva (Supra) at page 140 that, “……a direct appeal

does not lie to the Supreme Court from the order of the High Court in the

CPA/0084/2019

Page 24 of 25

exercise of the revisonary jurisdiction. An appeal from the order of the High

Court in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction should be made to the

Court of Appeal. Where a party is dissatisfied with the order of the Court of

Appeal, the party may, with leave of the Court of Appeal or when such leave

is refused by the Court of Appeal, with leave of the Supreme Court, appeal to

the Supreme Court” [Emphasis is mine]

In the light of the principle enunciated by the bench of five judges of the

Supreme Court in Abeywardene vs. Ajith de Silva (Supra), an appeal from

the order of the High Court in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction

should be made to the Court of Appeal.[Emphasis is mine]

In view of the law set out above, I would hold that, the Petitioners cannot

invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of this Court against the order dated

10.05.2019 made by the learned High Court Judge (P3) in the exercise of

concurrent or parallel revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154P(3)(b)

to be read with Article 138 of the Constitution and section 5 and 12 of the Act

for; the Petitioner have already exhausted the remedy available by the law as

enumerated above, and therefore, the Petitioner is now, debarred from

invoking the concurrent or parallel revisionary jurisdiction of this Court

against the said order of the learned High Court Judge made in the exercise

of concurrent or parallel jurisdiction, as rightly, contended by the

Respondents.

In the result, I would hold that the jurisdictional objection as to the

maintainability of the instant application in revision, is entitled to succeed in

law.

I would thus, uphold the same.

CPA/0084/2019

Page 25 of 25

Hence, I would dismiss the instant application in revision with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL