==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0377-381/19

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal No:

CA/HCC/0377-381/2019 The Hon. Attorney General

High Court of Matale Attorney General's Department

Case No: HC/296/2006 Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT

Vs.

1. Duraisamy Chamil Selvam

2. Selliah Balakrishnan

3. Irulan Adi Ganeshan

4. Duraisamy Chandran

5. Duraisamy Manoharan

6. Selvaraj Sivashakthi

ACCUSED

AND NOW

CA/HCC/0377-381/19

2 | P a g e

1.Duraisamy Chamil Selvam

2. Selliah Balakrishnan

3. Irulan Adi Ganeshan

4. Duraisamy Manoharan

5. Selvaraj Sivashakthi

ACCUSED-APPELLANTS

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Indica Mallawaratchy for the 1st and 4th

Appellants.

Saliya Peiris, PC with Pasindu

Thilakarathene for the 2nd and 3rd Accused-

Appellants.

Shanaka Ranasinghe, PC with Niroshan

Mihindukulasuriya and Anushika

Ranasinghe for the 5th Appellant.

Azard Navavi, ASG for the Respondent.

CA/HCC/0377-381/19

3 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 29/07/2025, 10/09/2025 and

16/10/2025

DECIDED ON : 08/12/2025

******************************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellants (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellants) along with the 4th accused were indicted jointly in the High Court

of Matale as follows:

1. That on or about the 20.06.2004 the accused named in the

indictment were members of an unlawful assembly with the common

objective of causing hurt to Karunakaran Suresh Kumar thereby

committing an offence punishable under Section 140 of the Penal

Code.

2. At the same time, same place and in the course of the same

transaction the accused committed the murder of Karunakaran

Suresh Kumar thereby committing an offence punishable under

Section 296 read with Section 146 of the Penal Code.

3. Under Section 296 read with Section 32 of the Penal Code. (Alternative

common intention charge to count 02).

CA/HCC/0377-381/19

4 | P a g e

4. At the same time, same place and in the course of the same

transaction the accused committed simple hurt to Karunakaran

Ashokan thereby committing an offence punishable under Section

314 read with Section 146 of the Penal Code.

5. Under Section 314 read with Section 32 of the Penal Code. (Alternative

common intention charge to count 04).

As the 4th accused had passed away during the pendency of the trial, the

indictment was amended accordingly.

The trial commenced before the High Court Judge of Kandy as the Appellants

had opted for a non-jury trial. After the conclusion of the prosecution’s case,

the learned High Court Judge had called for the defence and the Appellants

had made dock statements and closed their case.

After the conclusion of the final submissions of the defence, the case was

transferred to the High Court of Matale as the place of incident falls under

the jurisdiction of the newly established High Court in Matale.

After considering the evidence presented by both parties, the learned High

Court Judge who heard the case at the High Court of Kandy delivered the

Judgement in the High Court of Matale and had convicted the Appellants as

charged under Counts 1,2 and 4 and sentenced them as follows:

● Under the First Count - 06 months rigorous imprisonment with

a fine of Rs.10,000/- on each Appellant. The fine is subject to

02 months simple imprisonment.

● Under the Second Count - death sentence on each Appellant.

● Under the Fourth Count - 01-year imprisonment with a fine of

Rs.10,000/- on each Appellants. The fine is subject to 02

months simple imprisonment. Further, each Appellant is

CA/HCC/0377-381/19

5 | P a g e

directed to pay a compensation of Rs.10,000/- with a default

sentence of 06 months simple imprisonment.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellants

preferred this appeal to this court.

As the learned High Court Judge who passed the sentence had failed to

record the allocutus in terms of Section 280 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979, on 11/01/2023 this Court has directed the

then presiding High Court Judge of Matale to record the allocutus and send

the case record back to this Court. As per the direction, on 25.01.2023 the

learned High Court Judge of Matale had recorded the allocutus of the

Appellants and remitted the original case record back to this Court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellants informed this court that the

Appellants have given consent to argue this matter in their absence. Also, at

the time of argument the Appellants were connected via the Zoom platform

from prison.

Background of the Case.

The prosecution’s case rests on the testimony of an eye witness and

circumstantial evidence.

PW1, Karunakaran Ashokan is the eye witness in this case. The incident had

happened around 7.pm on 20.06.2004. The eye witness is the brother of the

deceased. The deceased was a three-wheeler driver at the time of his demise.

On the day of the incident, the eye witness also accompanied the deceased

who had gone on a hire at 6.30pm from Kandenuwara to Hunugala, as a

dispute relating to running hires had taken place between the deceased and

the 2nd Appellant. On their return, at about 7.pm, both the deceased and the

witness had noticed that their way was blocked by some stones that were

CA/HCC/0377-381/19

6 | P a g e

placed across the road. At that time, the deceased was driving the three-

wheeler.

When the deceased alighted from the three-wheeler to clear the road, a group

of people consisting of the 1st 2nd,3rd 5th and 6th (Now 1st ,2nd ,3rd 4th and 5th)

Appellants and the 4th Accused, had assaulted his brother and himself using

knife and stumps. The witness had run to the nearby jungle and had hidden

himself until he was discovered by the police. According to him, he had

identified the Appellants and the 4th Accused clearly with the aid of the head

light of the three-wheeler and a torch he had with him. He too sustained

injuries due to this unexpected attack.

PW2, Karunakaran Ravindran, is the elder brother of the deceased and the

owner of the three-wheeler which had been given to the deceased to hire. On

the day of the incident as the deceased was late to come home, he had gone

in search of him. At the place of the incident, he had found the three-wheeler

with blood stains. As he could not find his brothers, he had directly gone to

the Raththota Police Station and had lodged a complaint. When he returned

to the place of the incident with the police, he had found the deceased lying

fallen with bleeding injuries some distance away from the three-wheeler.

According to him the deceased had revealed the names of all the Appellants

and the 4th Accused.

According to PW07, the main investigating officer SI/Rasika Sampath who

visited the scene of crime, the deceased had told him that ‘Chandran’s

brother’ had assaulted him.

PW04, JMO Kodikara who held the post mortem of the deceased, had noted

08 cut injuries on the deceased’s body. According to him the cause of death

is due to hemorrhagic shock due to multiple cut injuries to the head, both

upper limbs and the right lower limb.

CA/HCC/0377-381/19

7 | P a g e

The 1st and 4th Appellants had filed the following grounds of appeal:

1. Total failure on the part of the Court to evaluate the evidence of the

chief investigation officer relating to the dying declaration, in its

correct judicial perspective, results in a serious prejudice being

caused to the Appellants.

2. Following closely on the heels of ground No.1, the conflict of evidence

between the chief investigation officer (PW7, namely Rasika

Sampath) and the sole eye witness (PW1, namely Karunakaran

Ashokan) creates a serious doubt in the prosecution’s case.

3. Evidence of the sole eye witness is contradicted by the medical

evidence (PW5, Dr. Tennakoon Banda) thereby creating a serious

doubt regarding the veracity of the version as testified by the eye

witness.

4. Evidence of the sole eye witness is further in conflict with the medical

evidence, thereby creating a serious doubt regarding the veracity of

the version of the eye witness.

5. The conviction, which hinges on the evidence of the sole eye witness,

is factually and legally untenable and flawed for the reasons

enumerated below, to wit;

A. The conflict of evidence between the chief investigating

officer and the sole eye witness creating a serious doubt

in the prosecution’s case.

B. The evidence of the said eye witness is contradicted by the

medical evidence thereby creating a serious doubt

regarding the veracity of the version as testified by the eye

witness.

C. The Police statement is involuntary.

CA/HCC/0377-381/19

8 | P a g e

D. This fails the test of promptness and test of consistency in

terms of Section 157 of the Evidence Ordinance.

E. The version of the sole eye witness fails the test of

probability.

F. The contradictions and omissions marked/highlighted

render his evidence unworthy of credence.

6. The judgment of the trial court is deficient and flawed and in

violation of Section 283 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

A. The learned trial judge had failed to apply his judicial

mind to the conflict of evidence between the prosecution

witnesses.

B. The trial judge had factually misdirected himself by

concluding that the evidence of prosecution witnesses is

corroborative, a factual finding which is totally fallacious

and wholly contrary to the evidence led at the trial.

C. Total failure on the part of the learned trial judge to apply

his judicial mind to the serious infirmities in the evidence

of the sole eye witness.

D. The Learned Trial Judge has erred in law by shifting the

burden of proof to the Appellants.

E. Although the convictions are based on a common

objective, the judgement is depleted of the legal principles

relating to the imputation of vicarious liability.

The 2nd and 3rd Appellants had filed the following grounds of appeal:

1. Burden of proof.

2. The rejection of the defence under Section 126A of the CPC is a

misdirection.

3. Identification of the 3rd Appellant at the scene of crime is doubtful.

CA/HCC/0377-381/19

9 | P a g e

The 5th Appellant had filed the following grounds of appeal:

1. Burden of proof.

2. Identification of the 5th Appellant at the scene of crime is doubtful.

Considering the grounds of appeal raised by the Appellants, it will be

considered on the following common grounds;

1. The prosecution has not proved the case beyond reasonable doubt.

2. The failure of the learned High Court judge to evaluate the dying

declaration of the deceased in its correct perspective.

3. The conviction which hinges on the evidence of the sole eye witness

is factually and legally untenable and flawed.

4. The rejection of the defence under Section 126A of the CPC is a

misdirection.

5. The judgment of the trial court is deficient and flawed and in

violation of Section 283 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

6. Identification of the Appellants at the scene of crime is doubtful.

As the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd common grounds are interconnected, all three will be

considered together hereinafter. The learned Counsel strenuously argued

that the infirmities in the evidence of the main eye witness have not been

given due consideration.

The learned Counsel for the Appellants mainly argued that the Learned Trial

Judge had failed to consider all the circumstances whether PW1,

Karunakaran Ashokan had witnessed the incident as claimed by him in his

testimony.

In CA/HCC/417/2018 decided on 14/03/2024 this court has held that:

Eyewitness testimony is one of the most important kinds of criminal

evidence. In criminal cases, the judges regularly face the difficult but

crucial task of evaluating eyewitness testimony. This sometimes means

checking whether the witness’s story fits with other established facts of

CA/HCC/0377-381/19

10 | P a g e

the case. However, the veracity of such a story cannot always be

verified or falsified directly. In such cases judges will have to look at

whether the statement comes from a reliable source.

Further, an eyewitness’s testimony is probably the most persuasive

form of evidence presented in court, but in many cases, its accuracy is

dubious. There is also evidence that mistaken eyewitness evidence can

lead to wrongful conviction—sending people to prison for years or

decades, even to death row, for crimes they did not commit.

In considering the evidence of an eye witness, the Court should look at

the demeanour of the witness, the inherent probability of the account,

any internal inconsistencies in the account, whether the account is

consistent with previous statements by the witness, whether the

witness has any bias against the accused or any family or group to

which the accused belongs, whether the evidence at the crime scene

supports the account, and whether the witness’s testimony is supported

by the testimony of other witnesses. These factors are very important

as the burden of proof is on the prosecution in all criminal cases.

As stated above, PW1, who is an eye witness had vividly explained how this

gruesome incident had happened. He had clearly seen the attack on the

deceased before he could escape from the crime scene with injuries.

The Learned High Court Judge in his judgment had considered the evidence

given by PW1 extensively and properly analyzed his evidence in its correct

perspective. Further, the learned High Court Judge had reasonably

considered all direct and circumstantial evidence to come to his decision.

In criminal trials, contradictions and omissions are serious discrepancies in

relation to witness testimony or evidence, which can affect the credibility of

such evidence. A contradiction refers to when a witness makes a statement

which is contradictory, in other words, opposite to what they previously

CA/HCC/0377-381/19

11 | P a g e

stated. An omission, refers to the failure to include or mention a crucial detail

from a prior statement by a witness. Such discrepancies are used to

challenge the trustworthiness and veracity of a witness, which could assist

in finding reasonable doubt, as evidence in multiple cases.

In a practical sense, cases are generally not completely free from omissions

or contradictions. The presence of such omissions or contradictions would

not always result in acquittal, neither will the absence of such omissions or

contradictions surely result in convictions. This is due to the fact that the

opposite may, in fact, take place; where the presence of such discrepancies

would lead to convictions and their absence would lead to acquittals.

As such, omissions and contradictions must be considered with a sole focus

on the assessment of a witness’s credibility, with an objective to extract the

truth from false statements. Furthermore, the importance of omissions or

contradictions may be lost with the passage of time, as memories of

witnesses’ fade, along with changes in circumstances. Accordingly, each

omission or contradiction must be considered with respect to the context of

each case, respectively.

In The Attorney General v Sandanam Pitchai Mary Theresa [2011] 2 SLR

292 the court held that:

“Whilst internal contradictions or discrepancies would ordinarily affect

the trustworthiness of the witness statement, it is well established that

the Court must exercise its judgment on the nature of the inconsistency

or contradiction and whether they are true material to the facts in issue.

Discrepancies which do not go to the root of the matter and assail the

basic version of the witness cannot be given too much importance.

CA/HCC/0377-381/19

12 | P a g e

Witnesses should not be disbelieved on account of trifling discrepancies

and omissions. When contradictions are marked, the Judge should

direct his attention to whether they are material or not and the witness

should be given an opportunity of explaining the matter”.

In the case of R v. Hepworth 1928 (AD) 265, at 277, Curlewis JA stated:

“A criminal trial is not a game where one side is entitled to claim the

benefit of any omission or mistake made by the other side, and a

Judge's position in a criminal trial is not merely that of an umpire to see

that the rules of the game are applied by both sides. A Judge is an

administrator of justice, not merely a figure-head, he has not only to

direct and control the proceedings according to recognised rules of

procedure but to see that justice is done”.

In this case, the learned High Court Judge at pages 401-495 and 500-503 of

the brief, had very extensively considered the contradictions marked and the

omissions highlighted and had given very plausible reasons as to why he

disregarded those contradictions and omissions. Hence, it is incorrect to say

that the learned High Court Judge had failed to evaluate the contradictions

and omissions adequately in the judgement.

Further, the eye witness PW1 had given evidence in the High Court nearly

05 years after the incident. A photographic memory cannot be expected from

him as PW1 is also an ordinary human being. I consider his evidence to be

clear and cogent and therefore has not shaken his credibility or testimonial

trustworthiness.

The learned Counsel for the 1st and 4th Appellant further argued that the

evidence of PW1 is contradicted by medical evidence. The learned High Court

Judge had very correctly analyzed the medical evidence in his judgment.

CA/HCC/0377-381/19

13 | P a g e

In the case of Menoka Malik and others v. The State of West Bengal and

others (2018) 2 SCeJ 1390 held that:

“It is by now well settled that the medical evidence cannot override the

evidence of ocular testimony of the witnesses-If there is a conflict between

the ocular testimony and the medical evidence, naturally the ocular

testimony prevails. In other words, where the eye witnesses account is

found to be trustworthy and credible, medical opinion pointing to

alternative possibilities is not accepted as conclusive”.

In the judgment of Darbara Singh v. State of Punjab, (2012) 10 SCC 476, it was held that:

“So far as the question of inconsistency between medical evidence and

ocular evidence is concerned, the law is well settled that, unless the oral

evidence available is totally irreconcilable with the medical evidence, the

oral evidence would have primacy. In the event of contradictions

between medical and ocular evidence, the ocular testimony of a witness

will have greater evidentiary value vis-à-vis medical evidence and when

medical evidence makes the oral testimony improbable, the same

becomes a relevant factor in the process of evaluation of such evidence.

It is only when the contradiction between the two is so extreme that the

medical evidence completely rules out all possibilities of the ocular

evidence being true at all, that the ocular evidence is liable to be

disbelieved…”

The doctor had noted about 08 injuries on the deceased. According to him

the cause of death is due to hemorrhagic shock due to multiple cut injuries

to the head, both upper limbs and the right lower limb. Considering the

evidence given by PW1, the medical evidence is not contradictory when

CA/HCC/0377-381/19

14 | P a g e

comparing with the evidence given by PW1. Hence, the learned High Court

Judge had not acted upon contradictory medical evidence.

Although it is not necessary to prove motive in a criminal trial, existence of

a motive would strengthen the prosecution’s case. In this case, the evidence

revealed that an enmity existed between the 2nd Appellant and the deceased

regarding the hiring of the deceased’s three-wheeler at a low cost. This

dispute had gone up to the police before this incident. The last incident had

happened at 11.00 am on the previous day of the incident. (Pages 475-476

of the brief).

Next the learned Counsel for the 1st and 4th Appellant contended that, had

the learned High Court Judge considered the dying declaration of the

deceased properly, he would not have convicted her clients in this case.

According to PW2 and PW7, when the deceased was discovered, he had

uttered that ‘Chandran Thambi’ had assaulted him. According to PW2,

‘Chandran Thambi’ is the 3rd Appellant in this case. Considering the evidence

given by PW7, the investigation officer, the learned High Court had

disregarded PW2’s evidence at pages 504-505 of his judgment. As the learned

High Court Judge mainly relied on the evidence given by PW1, the eye

witness, I am of the view that not considering the dying declaration of the

deceased had not caused any prejudice to the Appellants.

As per the 4th ground of appeal, the learned President’s Counsel for the

2nd,3rd and 4th Appellants contended that the learned High Court Judge had

wrongly rejected the alibi of the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th Appellants.

It is trite law that no burden is cast upon the accused to prove his alibi, as

the alibi is not a defence. It is the duty of the Learned High Court Judge to

consider the alibi and if any doubt arises in the mind of the Learned Trial

Judge, the benefit of the doubt must be awarded to the accused.

CA/HCC/0377-381/19

15 | P a g e

Learned High Court Judge in his judgment at pages 508-509 of the brief very

correctly considered the law pertaining to alibi under Section 126A of the

Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 and rejected the same after

giving plausible reasons. Hence, it is incorrect to say that the learned High

Court Judge had not considered the alibi in his judgment.

In this case, even though the learned High Court Judge had not had the

benefit to observe the demeanor and the deportment of all the witnesses

during the trial, he had properly evaluated the evidence given by both sides

to arrive at his finding. Considering the entirety of the judgment, it is

incorrect to say that the learned High Court Judge had totally disregarded

Section 283 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979. The

Learned High Court Judge has very correctly and accurately considered and

analyzed the prosecution and defence case and arrived at a correct finding

that the prosecution has proved the case beyond reasonable doubt.

In The Queen v. K.A. Santin Singho 65 NLR 447 the court held that:

“It is fundamental that the burden of proof is on the prosecution.

Whether the evidence the prosecution relies on is direct or

circumstantial, the burden is the same. This burden is not altered by the

failure of the appellant to give evidence and explain the circumstances”.

In Miller v. Minister of Pensions (1947) 2 All E.R. 372 the court held that:

“…the evidence must reach the same degree of cogency as is required

in a criminal case before an accused person is found guilty. That degree

is well settled. It need not reach certainty, but it must carry high degree

of probability. Proof beyond reasonable doubt does not mean proof

beyond the shadow of a doubt. The law would fail to protect the

community if it admitted fanciful possibilities to deflect the course of

justice. If the evidence is so strong against a man as to leave only a

remote possibility in his favour which can be dismissed with the

CA/HCC/0377-381/19

16 | P a g e

sentence, “of course it is possible, but not in the least probable,” the case

is proved beyond reasonable doubt, but nothing short of that will

suffice”.

In The King Vs. W. P. Buckley 43 NLR 474, it was stated by Howard, C.J.:

“In arriving at a verdict of guilty, the majority of the jury must have viewed

the evidence in sections accepted and convicted the appellant on those

parts that were satisfactory and disregard those facts that pointed to the

improbability of the story put forward by the Crown. The jury should have

viewed the evidence as a whole. If they had done so, we are of opinion

that they must have had a reasonable doubt as to the guilt of the appellant.

The verdict is in our opinion, unreasonable, in as much as taken as a whole

the evidence does not support the conviction.”

In the final ground of appeal, the learned President’s Counsel for the 2nd,3rd

and 5th Appellants contended that the identification of the 2nd ,3rd and 5th

Appellants at the scene of crime is doubtful.

In the judgment of Regina Vs. Turnbull and Another (1977) QB 224, it was

held:

“Whenever the case against an accused depends wholly on the

correctness of one or more identifications of the accused, which the

defence alleges to be mistaken, the judge should warn the jury of the

special need for caution before convicting the accused in reliance on the

correctness of the identification by the witness.” The judge should direct

the jury to examine closely the circumstances in which the identification

by each witness came to be made.

• Caution is required to avoid the risk of injustice.

CA/HCC/0377-381/19

17 | P a g e

•A witness who is honest may be wrong even if they are convinced, they

are right.

• A witness who is convincing may still be wrong.

• More than one witness may be wrong.

• A witness who recognizes the defendant, even when the witness

knows the defendant well, may be wrong.

Some of the circumstances a judge should direct the jury to examine in

order to find out whether a correct identification has been made include;

• The length of time the accused was observed by the witness;

• The distance the witness from the accused;

• The state of the light;

•The length of time elapsed between the original observation and the

subsequent identification to the police.

E.R.S.R. Coomaraswamy in his book ‘The Law of Evidence’ Volume 1 at

page 663 discusses the mistaken identity in the following manner.

“A fundamental requisite in a criminal case is to establish the identity

of the accused as the guilty party. The text-books abound with

instances of what were supposed to be clear identifications which

proved to be fallacious and defective. These include the case where an

honest witness was deceived by the broad glare of sunlight, (R. Vs.

Wood and Brown [Ann-Reg. 1784]) … …Much of the value of direct

evidence of identification will depend on the personal appearance of

the subject of identification. Many persons cannot be easily

distinguished from others. The liability mistake is greater where the

questionable identity is a matter of deduction and inference and the

expression of an opinion than where it is the subject of direct evidence.

(Wills, op. cit., 7th edition., pp 197-200)”

In this case PW1 had clearly seen all the Appellants at the time of committing

the offence. He had ample opportunity to see the assailants at the crime

CA/HCC/0377-381/19

18 | P a g e

scene. Further, the Appellants are persons known by PW1. He had correctly

identified each of them at the trial.

In this case the learned High Court Judge had considered and analyzed the

evidence accurately even though he did not have the advantage of seeing the

demeanour and deportment of some of the witnesses who had given evidence

before his predecessor.

The single most important criterion in evaluating the fairness of a trial is the

observance of the principle of equality of arms between the defence and the

prosecution. Equality of arms, which must be observed throughout the trial,

means that both parties are treated in a manner which ensures their

procedural equality during the course of the trial.

In this case the learned High Court Judge had considered the evidence

presented by both parties to arrive at his decision. He has properly analyzed

the evidence given by both sides in his judgment. As the evidence adduced

by the Appellants failed to create a doubt over the prosecution case, the

conclusion reached by the learned High Court Judge in this case cannot be

faulted.

In State of Uttar Pradesh v. M. K. Anthony [AIR 1985 SC 48] the court

held that:

“While appreciating the evidence of a witness, the approach must be

whether the evidence of the witness read as a whole appears to have a

ring of truth. Once that impression is formed, it is undoubtedly

necessary for the court to scrutinise the evidence more particularly

keeping in view the deficiencies, draw-backs and infirmities pointed out

in the evidence as a whole and evaluate them to find out whether it is

against the general tenor of the evidence given by the witness and

whether the earlier evaluation of the evidence is shaken as to render it

CA/HCC/0377-381/19

19 | P a g e

unworthy of belief. Minor discrepancies on trivial matters not touching

the core of the case, hyper-technical approach by taking sentences torn

out of context here or there from the evidence, attaching importance to

some technical error committed by the investigating officer not going to

the : root of the matter would not ordinarily permit rejection of the

evidence as a whole..…Even honest and truthful witnesses may differ

in some details unrelated to the main incident because power of

observation, retention and reproduction differ with individuals. Cross

examination is an unequal duel between a rustic and refined lawyer.”

In Sarkar on Evidence, 15th Edition at page 112, it is stated as follows:

“Minor discrepancies are possible even in the version of truthful

witnesses and such minor discrepancies only add to the truthfulness of

their evidence. [Sidhan v. State of Kerela [1986] Cri LJ 470, 473 (Kerala)].

But discrepancies in the statements of witnesses on material points

should not be lightly passed over, as they seriously affect the value of

their testimony (Brij Lal v. Kunwar, 36A 187: 18 CWN 649: A 1914 PC

38). The main thing to be seen in whether the inconsistencies go to the

root of the matter or pertain to insignificant aspects thereof. In the former

case, the defence may be justified in seeking advantage of the

incongruities obtaining in the evidence. In the latter, however no such

benefit may be available to it. (Krishna Pillai Sree Kumar v. State of

Kerala A [1981] SC 1237,1239).”

As discussed under the appeal grounds advanced by the Appellants, the

prosecution has adduced strong and incriminating evidence against the

Appellants. The Learned High Court Judge had very correctly analyzed all

the evidence presented by all the parties and arrived at a correct finding that

the Appellants were guilty of committing the murder of the deceased in this

case.

CA/HCC/0377-381/19

20 | P a g e

Therefore, I affirm the conviction and dismiss the Appeal of the Appellants.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgement to the High

Court of Matale along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL