==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 10

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal against an

order of the High Court under S.331 of the

Code of Criminal Procedure Act No 15 of

1979

Democratic Social Republic of Sri Lanka.

.

COMPLAINANT

Court of Appeal CA Case No :

CA/HCC/243-244/2018

HC of Trincomalee Case No.

HCT 669/2016

Vs.

01. Balasingham Naguleswarn

02. Vijayakumar Chandrapalan

03. Krishnabalan Rajeevkanthan

04. Sivakumar Sivaruban

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

01. Balasingham Naguleswarn

02. Vijayakumar Chandrapalan

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Page 2 of 10

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General,

Hon. Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDANT.

Before: Hon Justice B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Hon Justice Amal Ranaraja

Counsel : Tenny Fernando for the 1st Accused-Appellant.

Indika Mallawaratchy for the 2nd Accused-Appellant.

Azard Navavi, PC, ASG, for the Respondent.

Written Submission: 04.10.2021 (by the 2nd Accused – Appellant)

On 17.08.2021(by the Complainant - Respondent)

Argued On: 26.02.2026

Judgment On: 14.05.2026

JUDGEMENT

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

The Accused- Appellants (hereinafter referred to as the 1st and the 2nd Appellant),

along with the 3rd Accused and the 4th Accused, were indicted before the High

Court of Trincomalee on the charge of committing the offence of murder of one

Kuruwesingham Srivanthani on 24th November 2011, punishable under Section

296 read with Section 32 of the Penal Code.

Page 3 of 10

At the conclusion of the trial, the Learned High Court Judge, by judgment dated

07.08.2018, found both Appellants guilty of murder and imposed the death

sentence and acquitted both 3rd and 4th Accused.

Being aggrieved by the said conviction and the sentences, Appellants sought to

challenge their validity on the following grounds,

1. Items of circumstantial evidence are wholly inadequate to support the

conviction.

2. Application of the Ellenborough principle is wholly inadequate to support

the conviction.

It should be noted that there were no eyewitnesses to the incident, and the

prosecution case was based entirely on circumstantial evidence. Accordingly, it is

necessary to consider the established principles governing the evaluation of cases

found on circumstantial evidence.

In King v. Abeywickrama, 44 NLR 254, Soertsz J remarked thus:

“In order to base a conviction on circumstantial evidence the Jury must be

satisfied that the evidence was consistent with the guilt of the accused and

inconsistent with any reasonable hypothesis of this innocence.”

In King v. Appuhamy, 46 NLR 128, Kueneman J held thus:

“ in order to justify the inference of guilt from purely circumstantial

evidence, the inculpatory facts must be incompatible with the innocence of

the accused and incapable of explanation upon any other reasonable-

hypothesis the that of his guilt.”

In Podisingho v. King, 53 NLR 49, Dias J remarked thus:

“That in a case of circumstantial evidence it is the duty of the trial Judge to

tell the Jury that such evidence must be totally inconsistent with the

innocence of the accused and must only be consistent with his guilt.”

Page 4 of 10

In Krishantha De Silva vs The Attorney General [2003] (1) SLR, 162, it was held

inter alia that:

“Circumstantial evidence can be acted upon only if from the circumstances

relied upon the only reasonable inference to draw is the inference of guilt.

If the circumstances are consistent both with guilt and with innocence then

the case is not proved on circumstantial evidence.

Recently, Aluwihare, PC, J, in Junaiden Mohamed Haaris v. Attorney General,

SC Appeal 118/17, Decided on 09.11.2018, held that:

“Before I consider the facts of the case and the legal issues raised in this

appeal, it should be borne in mind that the prosecution relied entirely on

circumstantial evidence to establish the charges, for the reason that there

were no eyewitnesses to substantiate any of the charges against the

Accused-Appellant. Thus, it was incumbent on the prosecution to establish

that the ‘circumstances’ the prosecution relied on, are consistent only with

the guilt of the accused- Appellant and not with any other hypothesis.

Regard should be had to a set of principles and rules of prudence,

developed in a series of English decisions, which are now regarded as

settled law by our courts.

The two basic principles are-

i. The inference sought to be drawn must be consistent with all the

proved facts, if it is not, then the inference cannot be drawn.

ii. The proved facts should be such that they exclude every reasonable

inference from them, save the one to be drawn. If they do not

exclude other reasonable inferences, then there must be a doubt

whether the inference sought to be drawn is correct (per Waterm

eyer J. in R vs. Blom 1939 A.D. 188)”

Page 5 of 10

Bearing these legal principles in mind, it becomes incumbent upon this Court to

undertake a careful and dispassionate evaluation of the facts and circumstances

attendant to the present case.

According to the testimony of PW1, Kanagaraja Kalaichelvan, on 24.11.2011, he

was on his way to attend a meeting at the Zonal Education Office in Muthur. On

his way, he met a farmer at Santhosapuram who stopped him and informed him

that a female had fallen among the shrubs. Thereafter, he had reported the

incident to the police, and only then he had got to know that the deceased was a

teacher at his school. He also stated that he gave a statement to the Police on the

same day.

PW06, Saravanamuthu Saravanapavan, testified that on 24.11.2011, he left his

home at about 7.20 a.m. on his motorcycle to travel to work. While passing a

culvert on the way, he was required to slow down and place their feet on the ground,

and he observed a person from a neighbouring village sharpening a small object,

though he could not identify whether it was a knife or an axe. The witness had

identified the person at the culvert as the 1st Appellant. He further stated that

another individual was also present at the location, and he didn't see his face.

PW 16, Kanapathypillai Navaratnarasa, a villager, testified that while returning

from selling vegetables, he saw the 1st Appellant at a culvert sharpening an axe.

When he questioned the Appellant, he was told that they were going to cut

firewood, and the witness identified that person as the 1st Appellant. The witness

stated that he saw the 1st Appellant at about 7.30 a.m. and observed that the axe

had a handle approximately three feet in length. He identified a production

marked “P1” as an axe similar to the one he had seen.

PW04, Kurukulasingham Srimathi, the mother of the deceased, testified that her

daughter, who was a teacher, died on 24.11.2011. She stated that her daughter

regularly wore jewellery, including a chain with a pendant, bangles, and rings,

when going to work from her elder brother’s residence. Upon receiving news of her

daughter’s death, she went to the scene where the Police showed her the jewellery

recovered in connection with the incident. She identified the said jewellery as

Page 6 of 10

belonging to her daughter and, during her evidence before the Court, marked them

“P-1a” to “P-7”.

PW 12, Maheswaran Santhi, testified that she had come to testify in relation to a

heart-shaped ring which was identified as P6. She stated that the said ring was

given to her by the 1st Appellant, who requested Rs. 2,000/-, stating that his

children were hungry. She stated that she obtained Rs. 2,000/- from her mother

and handed it over. Thereafter, she gave the ring to her mother. She further stated

that the Police later came, took her to Sampur Police Station, and, upon request,

the ring was handed over to them. She also stated that the incident took place on

24.11.2011 and that she gave a statement to the Police in this connection.

It should be noted that according to the witness, the 1st appellant gave the ring to

her on 24.11.2011 at 3.30 p.m.

PW 14, Gunabalaratna Nisiyananthan, stated that the chain was given to him

near the Bank by his elder cousin brother, 1st Appellant, requesting him to pawn

it on his behalf. He stated that, then he took the chain from the Appellant. The

witness further stated that when the chain was handed over to him, he questioned

why the Appellant did not pawn it himself, to which he replied that he did not

have his identity card and that his child was suffering from fever, and requested

him to pawn it on his behalf. He stated that he thereafter pawned the chain and

handed over the cash obtained to the Appellant.

It should be noted that evidence of PW12 and PW14 established that the 1st

Appellant handed over the jewellery to them. The said jewellery was identified by

the mother of the deceased, PW 04, as belonging to the deceased when she left the

house. Significantly, this aspect of the evidence was not challenged during cross-

examination. The evidence relating to the identity of jewellery remains unshaken.

Through these witnesses, the prosecution has established that the 1st Appellant

gave jewellery to them. It was given to them within a short period of time on the

same day. This fact was not contradicted by the 1st Appellant.

It is well settled that where the evidence of a witness on a material point is not

challenged in cross-examination, it should be taken that such evidence is not

Page 7 of 10

disputed and is accepted, subject to the witness being otherwise reliable. I am

mindful of the following judgments.

In Edrick de Silva v. Chandradasa de Silva, 70 NLR page 169 at 170, Justice

H.N.G. Fernando held that,

“Where there is ample opportunity to contradict the evidence of a witness

but is not impugned or assailed in Cross-examination that is a special fact

and feature in the case. It is a matter falling within the definition of the

word “Prove” in section 3 of the evidence Ordinance, and a trial Judge or

court must necessarily take that fact into consideration in adjudicating the

issue before it.”

In the case of Dedimuni Wimalasena and Dedimuni Indrasena Vs AG CA No.

135/2003, decided on 10.06.2008, Sisira de Abrew J. held that

"Whenever the evidence given by a witness on a material point is not

challenged in cross examination it has to be concluded that such evidence

is not disputed and is accepted by the opponent subject of course to the

qualification that witness is a reliable witness"

It is pertinent to refer to the following Indian Judgments.

In the case of State of Himachal Pradesh vs. Thakur Dass (1983) 2 Criminal Law

Journal 1694 at 1701, V D Visva C.J held:

"Whenever a statement of fact made by a witness is not challenged in cross

examination it must be concluded that the fact in question is not disputed"

In the case of Sarwansingh Vs. State of Punjab (2002) AIR Supreme Court (iii)

3652 at 3655 the Indian Supreme Court held thus:

"It is a rule of essential justice whenever the opponent has declined to avail

himself of the opportunity to put his case in cross examination it must follow

that the evidence tendered on this issue ought to be accepted"

Page 8 of 10

It should be noted that jewellery was recovered based on the 1st Appellant’s

statements, and our courts have examined the impact of Section 27 in relation to

this recovery.

Ariyasinghe and Others V Attorney General, 2004 (2) SLR 357, Gamini

Amaratunga, J. Held That;

“The facts discovered by the portions of statements of the accused persons and

their acts of pointing out the places where G/66 notes were found were that the

accused had knowledge that G/66 notes were in the places described and

pointed out by them. How did they know that G/66 notes were in those places?

In order to find out the answer to this question the learned trial Judge has

considered the ways in which the accused could have gained such Knowledge.

According to the analysis, there were three ways in which the accused persons

could have acquired their knowledge about the places where G/66 notes were

found. The following are the three ways.

I. The accused himself concealed those G/66 notes found in the place where

they were found.

II. The accused saw another person concealing the notes in that place.

III. A person who had seen another person concealing those notes in that

place has told the accused about it.”

Applying the aforesaid dictum to the present case, this Court is satisfied that the

Appellant was aware that the jewellery in question belonged to the deceased. But

he has not denied that he made a statement to the effect.

When the prosecution has led incriminating circumstantial evidence, the question

necessarily arises whether the Appellant has offered any explanation capable of

establishing his innocence.

This dictum was considered in the following Indian judgment.

Page 9 of 10

In the case of State of Tamil Nadu vs. Rajendran 1999 Cri L.J. 4552, the Indian

Supreme Court observed thus:

"In a case of circumstantial evidence when an incriminating circumstance

is put to the accused and the said accused either offers no explanation or

offers an explanation which is found to be untrue, then the same becomes

an additional link in the chain of circumstances to make it complete."

This judgement was referred by His Lordship Pradeep Hettiarachchi J, in the case

of Wedakkara Nekethige Premarathne alias Korale Raja v Attorney General,

CA/HCC/0119/2019, decided on 30.01.2026.

In the dock statement, the 1st Appellant contended that he was in Awissawella at

the relevant time. This assertion, however, stands contradicted by the testimony

of PW16 and PW6, both of whom categorically stated that they had seen the

Applicant on the day in question. It is further significant to note that the defence

did not put to these witnesses any suggestion that the 1st Appellant was elsewhere

at the material time.

In the circumstances, I am compelled to hold that the plea of alibi advanced by the

defence is an afterthought, devoid of credibility and unsupported by the evidence

on record. The dock statement of the 1st Appellant has not succeeded in creating

any reasonable doubt over the prosecution case. I further hold that, in the face of

strong incriminating evidence led by the prosecution, the 1st Appellant was

required to furnish a plausible explanation. The failure to do so leads to the

inference that no such explanation was available to him.

I am mindful of the judgment of the Indian case of Saundraraj v. The State of

Madya Pradesh (1954) 55 Cr. L.J.257, it has been held that in cases where murder

and robbery were shown to be part of the same transaction, recent and

unexplained possession of stolen articles, in the absence of circumstances tending

to show that the accused was only a receiver, would not only be presumptive

evidence on the charge of robbery but also on the charge of murder.

The above said case was referred by His Lordship Sampath B. Abayakoon, J. in

HCC/262/16 Kumarasinghe Arachchilage Samantha v. Attorney General.

Page 10 of 10

With the above incriminating evidence, I hold that the inference of guilt must be

the one and only irresistible and inescapable conclusion that can be arrived at,

that the 1st Appellant committed the murder of Kuruwesingham Srivanthani and

took the jewellery which was mentioned in the indictment.

In my opinion, the prosecution has proved the case beyond a Reasonable doubt.

For the above-mentioned reasons, I am disinclined to interfere with the judgment

of the Learned High Court Judge against the 1st Appellant, namely Balasingham

Naguleswarn.

The learned Additional Solicitor General, who appears for the Attorney General,

upholding the best tradition of the Attorney General's Department, submitted to

the court that he was unable to support the conviction against the 2nd Appellant,

namely, Vijayakumar Chandrapalan.

Having considered all the foregoing matters, I am of the view that the conviction

and sentence imposed upon the 2nd Appellant cannot be sustained. Accordingly,

the conviction and sentence are hereby set aside, and the 2nd Appellant is

acquitted of the charge.

I dismiss the Appeal against the 1st Appellant and affirm the conviction and

sentence of the Learned High Court judge dated 07.08.2018 against the 1st

Appellant, namely Balasingham Naguleswarn.

Appeal partly allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Amal Ranaraja J,

I AGREE

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL