Page 1 of 8

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Revision and/or Restitutio in Integrum under and in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

CA Case No: RII/51/2023 Beligahamullage Peiris Irosh Kavinda, District Court - Kalutara Galhena Road, Case No. 534/RE Welipitiya, Dharga Nagar.

Plaintiff Vs.

1. Nakandalage Don Sureka Srimali,

No. 68, Horawala Road, Dharga Nagar.

AND Koswattegoda, Dharga Nagar.

2. Nakandalage Don Amila Eranda

Weerasinghe, No. 68, Horawala Road, Dharga Nagar.

AND Koswattegoda, Dharga Nagar.

3. Nakandalage Don Ajantha

Pushpakumara, No. 70, Horawala Road, Dharga Nagar.

AND Koswattegoda, Dharga Nagar.

Page 2 of 8

4. Nakandalage Don Thilak Shantha,

No. 70, Horawala Road, Dharga Nagar. AND Koswattegoda, Dharga Nagar.

5. Denagama Liyanage Gihan Sampath,

No. 68C, Horawala Road, Dharga Nagar. AND Koswattegoda, Dharga Nagar.

6. Benthara Mahakumarage Madhava

Sampath Mahakumara, Prasad, Kuttiweligoda, Dharga Nagar.

Defendants AND NOW

Beligahamullage Peiris Irosh Kavinda, Galhena Road, Welipitiya, Dharga Nagar.

Plaintiff- Petitioner

Vs. 1. Nakandalage Don Sureka Srimali,

No. 68, Horawala Road, Dharga Nagar. AND Koswattegoda, Dharga Nagar.

2. Nakandalage Don Amila Eranda

Weerasinghe, No. 68, Horawala Road, Dharga Nagar. AND Koswattegoda, Dharga Nagar.

Page 3 of 8

3. Nakandalage Don Ajantha

Pushpakumara, No. 70, Horawala Road, Dharga Nagar.

AND Koswattegoda, Dharga Nagar. 4. Nakandalage Don Thilak Shantha,

No. 70, Horawala Road, Dharga Nagar. AND

Koswattegoda, Dharga Nagar. 5. Denagama Liyanage Gihan Sampath,

No. 68C, Horawala Road, Dharga Nagar. AND

Koswattegoda, Dharga Nagar. 6. Benthara Mahakumarage Madhava

Sampath Mahakumara, Prasad, Kuttiweligoda,

Dharga Nagar.

Defendant- Respondents

Before: R. Gurusinghe J.

&

M.C.B.S. Morais J.

Counsel: Harith de Mel with Sahiru Jayasinghe and Dulani Peiris instructed by Chamali Ranatunge for the Plaintiff-Petitioner.

Anuradha N. Ponnamperuma instructed by Savanthi Diluka Ponnamperuma for the 6th Defendant- Respondent.

Written Submissions: By the Plaintiff- Petitioner on 08.12.2023, 19.01.2024,

25.11.2024, 20.12.2024

By the 6th Defendant- Respondent on 18.01.2024,26.11.2024

Page 4 of 8

Argued on: 02.12.2024

Decided On: 28.03.2025

JUDGMENT

M.C.B.S. Morais J.

This is an application for Restitutio in Integrum coupled with revision, filed under Article 138

of the constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka against the order of the

learned District Court of Kalutara dated 16th of November 2023.

The Action RE/534 was initiated by Belingahamullage Peiris Irosh Kavinda (hereinafter

sometimes will be referred to as the Petitioner) against 1st 5th Respondents (hereinafter

sometimes will be referred to as the Respondents) on 8th November 2018 in respect of the

property more fully described in the schedule to the Plaint dated 8th November 2018 which

has a commercial value of Rs.35,000,000. Accordingly, the Petitioner has prayed for the

following:

I. Issue Notice on the 1st, 3rd, 4th and 6th Defendant-Respondents and the 2nd and 5th

Respondents if Your Lordships Court pleases;

II. Act in Revision and set aside the Order dated 16th November 2023; of the Learned

District Judge of Kalutara

III. Exercise the powers of Restitutio in Intergrum and restore the Plaintiff Petitioner to

the status quo he had been as at the 15th November 2023 in respect of the property to

the Schedule of the Plaint;

IV. Grant an Interim Order suspending the operation of the Order of the Learned District

Judge of Kalutara dated 16th November 2023;

V. Grant an Interim Order against the Defendant Respondents to maintain the status quo

as at 15th November 2023 in respect of the property to the schedule to the Plaint;

Page 5 of 8

VI. Grant an Interim Order reinstating the Interim Injunctions granted by the District

Court of Kalutara in terms prayers (), () and () to the Plaint of the Plaintiff-

Petitioner;

VII. Act in Revision and make Order directing the District Court of Kalutara to hear the

trial in 534/RE from the point of dismissal;

VIII. Grant costs;

IX. Grant such other and further relief as Your Lordships Court deem fit.

An enjoining order was granted on 21st of November 2018 at the first instance and an interim

injunction was granted subsequently on 16th of January 2019 in respect of the property

described in the plaint, preventing the Respondents from carrying out business in the said

property. Due to the absence of the 2nd and 5th Respondents in the trial, the matter was fixed

ex parte against the 2nd and 5th Respondents. The matter was refixed for trial on the 8th of

August 2023 and the Petitioner was required to file his affidavit Evidence-in-Chief one

month before the commencement of the trial. However, the Petitioner had filed the affidavit

Evidence-in-Chief on 3rd August 2023, less than a week before the trial. Therefore, when the

matter was taken up for trial on the 8th of August 2023, the learned District Court Judge of

Kalutara considered the following; the delay in filing the affidavit, certain defects in the

Affidavit, negligence of the Attorney-at-law for the Petitioner. Consequently, the Petitioner

was ordered to pay a sum of Rs. 25000 for 1st, 3rd, 4th, and 6th Respondents. Respecting the

said order the Petitioner has made the payment for the 1st, 3rd and 4th Respondents by bank

transfer and cash for the 6th Respondent in open court.

It is the contention of the Petitioner that when the matter was called up for trial on 16th of

November 2023, the particular matter was not called in the trial roll and the file was not

avalable in the court. Further, the Petitioner contends that the learned District Court Judge has

acted injudiciously by making crude remarks addressing the Registered Attorney-at-law for

the Petitioner in the open court. When the matter was taken up later, the Petitioner has

submitted a fresh copy of the Affidavit on 30th of October 2023, by rectifying the defect as

the place of signing was not mentioned previously. However, the Respondents have

contended to re-fix the matter for cross examination as the Affidavit has only been filed

before two weeks. Subsequently, the learned District Court Judge has dismissed the action

subject to cost by the order dated 16th November 2023. It is the contention of the Petitioner

Page 6 of 8

that the learned District Court Judge has acted ex mere motu, as the dismissal was not

requested by either party.

The Respondent contends that the Attorney-at-law for the Petitioner has acted negligently by

not exercising due diligence before submitting the documents to the court. Furthermore, the

learned District Court Judge of Kalutara in her order dated 16th of November 2023, has

highlighted that the Attorney-at-law for the Petitioner has submitted defective documents in

more than one instance despite the orders of the court. The Affidavit which was filed on the

3rd of August 2023 did not contain the Jurat, therefore the Petitioner was allowed to file

another affidavit. The Subsequent Affidavit which was submitted on the 12th of October

2023, also contained a defect as the place of signature was not mentioned. Finally, another

affidavit was presented to the court on 30th of October 2023, without obtaining the permission

of the court. It is the view of the learned District Court Judge that the Attorney-at-law has

acted grossly negligent and the affidavit of Plaintiffs evidence-in-chief submitted in the case

RE/534 has not been filed within the prescribed time as per the Civil Procedure Code and the

learned District Court Judge of Kalutara has dismissed the claim on the premise that the

Petitioner is not prepared for the trial.

Though in fact the final/proper affidavit is filed on the 30th of October 2023, which is not

before a month from the trial date which was fixed for 16th of November 2023, the issue is

whether it warrants a dismissal of the Petitioners case? It should be noted that on this

instance, filing of evidence (examination in chief) was allowed on the request of the

Petitioners counsel, for the convenience of court. It is apparent as for the proceedings, that

on 16th of November 2023 none of the contesting Respondents have either moved for a

dismissal of the action or has seriously objected to the said affidavit filed on 30th of October

2023 being accepted due to delay. The 6th Respondents main contention was that it was filed

without having obtained prior permission from the court, which surely is a curable defect.

Another issue would be whether the delay in filing the evidence as directed, should affect the

ex-parte trials which were fixed against the 2nd and 5th Defendants as well?

However, we should consider that even if the Petitioner has failed on his undertaking, since

the matter has already been fixed for trial on that day, should not the learned trial judge have

called the Petitioner to produce evidence, orally? As for the proceedings on the 16th of

November 2023, the Petitioner was present in court and was ready to give evidence. Would

Page 7 of 8

such circumstances justify a dismissal of the Petitioners case? In my view, having called to

produce the evidence, if the Petitioner failed to do so only, the court should conclude that the

Petitioner is not ready for the trial, which may have warranted a dismissal.

Though it is contended by the Petitioner that the learned trial Judge was biased in her

conduct, such contention lacks any material proof. As pointed out by His Lordship Dr.

A.R.B. Amerasinghe in his book Judicial Conduct Ethics and Responsibilities (2002) pg

524.

Since the issue is not whether the Judge was biased but whether a person in the

applicants position, and conversant with the facts, might reasonably apprehend that

the judge was biased.

Further, In the case of Rex V. Sussex Justices. Ex Parte Mccarthy [1923] 1 KB 256 Lord

Hewart C.J. held that;

.. a long line of cases shows that it is not merely of some importance but is of

fundamental importance that justice should not only be done, but should manifestly

and undoubtedly be seen to be done.

Therefore, as I have observed above, it seems that the conduct of the learned trial Judge may

attract suspicion of bias in a fair-minded person, and justice is not manifestly and

undoubtedly seen to be done. Further, upon reviewing all the facts and materials presented to

this court, it is evident that the learned District Court Judge has failed to provide the

Petitioner with a fair hearing, thereby seeming to have acted injudiciously. Moreover, the

right to a fair hearing is a fundamental principle of natural justice, and it must be upheld.

Therefore, it is my considered view that the learned District Court Judge has acted

injudiciously by dismissing the claim of the Petitioner without any legal ground valid in law.

Page 8 of 8

For the aforesaid reasons, I allow this application and set aside the order delivered by the

learned District Court Judge of Kalutara dated 16th of November 2023 in the action RE/534

and the case is restituted back to the time immediately prior to the impugned dismissal.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

R. Gurusinghe J.

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal