, .

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

In the matter of an application for writs of

Certiorari and Mandamus under Article 140

of the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

B.S.E.M. Perera

09, Anthony Avenue

Peralanda Road,

Ragama.

Petitioner.

CA. Writ Application No. 410/08, Vs.

CA 411/08, CA 419/08 and CA 420/08

1. Victor Perera

Inspector General of Police

Police Headquarters

Colombo-Ol.

2 Neville Piyadigama

Chairman,

National Police Commission

Rotunda Tower Level 3

109, Galle Road

Colombo-03.

'.

2

3 K.C. Logeswaran

Secretary,

National Police Commission,

Rotunda Tower Level 3

109, Galle Road,

Colombo-03

4. Chandradasa Nanayakkara

Member,

National Police Commission

Rotunda Tower Level 3

109, Galle Road,

Colombo-03.

5 R. Sivaraman

Member

National Police Commission

Rotunda Tower Level 3

109, Galle Road,

Colombo-03.

6, Ven. Elle Gunawansa Thero

Member

National Police Commission

Rotunda Tower Level 3

109, Galle Road,

Colombo-03.

3

7 Ms. Charmane Madurasinghe

Member

National Police Commission

Rotunda Tower Level 3

109, Galle Road,

Colombo-03.

8. Nihal Jayamanne

Member,

National Police Commission

Rotunda Tower Level 3

Colombo-03

9. M.M.M. Mawjood

Member,

National Police Commission

Rotunda Tower Level 3

109, Galle Road

Colombo-03

10.5. Amarasekera

Secretary,

Ministry of Highways and Road

Development

9th Floor, Sethsiripaya

Battaramulla

4

11.H.M.D Herath

Deputy Inspector General of Police

Eastern Range (Central)

Batticaloa

12. L.A. Jayasinghe

Deputy Inspector General of Police

Training od Exam Range

Police Headquarters

Colombo-Ol.

13.P.S.K. Rajapaksa

Deputy Inspector General of Police

Ampara (Operations) Range

Ampara.

14. J. Abeysirigunawardena

Deputy Inspector General of Police

Central Range (East)

Nuwara Eliya.

15 W.P. Dayaratne,

Deputy Inspector General of Police

Ombudsman Range

Police Headquarters

5

Colombo.

16 A.N.S. Mendis

Deputy Inspector General of Police

CID,TIO and DIU Range

Police Headquarters

Colombo-Ol.

17 VASP Nanyakkara

Deputy Inspector General of Police

North Western Range (West)

Puttlam

18 F, Mitchell

Deputy Inspector General of Police

Recruitment Range

Police Headquarters

Colombo-01.

19 HAD Gunathilake

Deputy Inspector General of Police

Monaragala {Operations )Range

Monaragala.

BEFORE:

6

20 U.P. Hewage

Deputy Inspector General of Police

Crimes (PHQ) Range

Police Headquarters

Colombo-Ol.

21 The Secretary

Ministry of Defence

Colombo-Ol.

22 The Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Hulftsdorp

Colombo-12.

23 The Inspector General of Police

Police Headquarters

Colombo-Ol.

Respondents.

Hon. Sathya Hettige P.e. J. President of the Court of Appeal

Hon. Anil Goonaratne J. Judge of the Court of Appeal

COUNSEL: D.P. Kumarasinghe PC with M.H.Kumarasinghe for the petitioner

Y.J.W Wijetilake ASG with Ms. Maithree Amarasinghe SC for 1st

to 10th 21st and 22nd respondents.

ARGUED ON: 13/01/2010,24/02/2010 and 09/06/2010

Written Submissions tendered on 27/07/2010

DECIDED ON: 11.01.2011.

7

SATHYA HETTIGE P.C J, (PICA)

When this matter was taken up for argument on 13/01/2010 the learned

President's Counsel for petitioners informed court at the outset of the

proceedings, that 4 petitioners filed four applications bearing nos. CA

410/2008, CA 411/2008 ,419/2008 and 420/08 seeking relief against the

wrongful denial of promotion to the petitioners to the rank of Deputy

Inspector General of Police (DIG). However, Mr. Kumarasinghe agreed that

only CA application No. 410/08 should be taken up for argument as the

petitioners in other application nos. CA 411/08, CA 419/08 and CA 420/08

have retired from service

Both counsel agreed at the outset that the decision of this application will

apply to and will be binding on all parties in all four applications as the

most of the facts in all four applications were identical and common.

The petitioner in this application is seeking inter alia, the following reliefs

a) A Writ of Mandamus directing the 21st respondent to take all

necessary steps or cause such steps to be taken to forthwith promote

and appoint the petitioner to the rank of Deputy Inspector General of

Police with effect from the date on which the 11th to 20th

respondents were promoted or in the alternative,

b) A writ of Certiorari quashing the

i the marking scheme marked P 10

ii the selection of the 11th to 20th respondents to the rank of DIG

C) Writ of Mandamus directing the 21st respondent to hold fresh

interviews for the selection of DIG upon a reasonable and rational

marking scheme made known to all the candidates reasonably in

advance

8

d) Call for the marks sheet / notes kept by each member of the

Interview Board in respect of the petitioner and each of 11th to 20th

respondents.

e) To make order directing the 21st respondent to pay suitable

compensation to the petitioner.

On a careful perusal of the petition it appears that the case of the

petitioner is that the marking scheme that was used by the Interview

Board to assess the petitioners and the manner in which the marking

scheme marked P 10 was applied at the interview is unreasonable.

The said marking scheme which sets out six categories of assessment

relating to this application is marked P10.

The petitioner claims that the Application of the marking scheme in

respect of the petitioner at the interview was grossly unfair and the

marking scheme marked P 10 should have been fair and just both in

formulation and application. The petitioner further claims that as stated

in paragraph 30 of the petition that in fact he was entitled to receive

a minimum of 53.25 marks on the objectively assessable criteria of the

same marking scheme marked P10.

The petitioner complains that denial of promotion to the petitioner as

Deputy Inspector General of Police and the promotion of the 16th and

18th respondents are unreasonable and arbitrary, capricious and in

violation of procedural fairness on the part of the 1st to the 10th

respondents. Further, the petitioners complain that not only that they

were denied of their promotions as Deputy Director General of Police

but officers who were junior to the petitioners in the rank of Senior

Superintendent of Police were promoted over the petitioners in this

application and the petitioners in all connected applications. In that In

the case of the petitioner in this application, the 16th and 18th

respondents were promoted over the petitioner.

9

The 1st respondent by RTM dated 05/02/2008 marked P 9 informed the

petitioner that National Police Commission has decided to hold

interviews for selection of Deputy Inspectors General of Police (DIGs)

and the said document marked P 9 set forth the eligibility criteria for

application. The petitioner presented himself for the Interview on

07/03 2008 and by the RTM dated 13/03/2008 the successful

candidates were announced by the 1st respondent. The petitioner had

not been selected.

Marking Scheme referred to in P 9 and relevant to this application is

marked P 10.

It appears that the marking Scheme marked P 10 used by the

Interview Board sets forth several heads under which the candidates

were evaluated and marks had been given namely,

(i) Period of Service ( 45 marks),

(ii) Capacity assessment ( 30 marks),

(iii) Outstanding performances (10 marks),

(iv)Medals ( 5 marks),

(v) Specialized qualifications ( 6 marks) and

(vi) Language Skills ( 4 marks).

The report of the Selection Board containing the final list of selected

candidates in order of merits that the candidates were placed according

to the marks they obtained is marked 1 R 4 by the respondents in

the Statement of Objections. The petitioner in this application has

received 64.25 marks and has been placed 25. However, the petitioner

in the Counter affidavit filed on 21/01/2009, has failed to specifically

admit or deny the document marked 1 R 4.

The respondents filed their objections raising several preliminary

objections to the maintainability of the petitioner's application.

10

At the hearing of this application along with connected applications

nos. CA 411/2008, CA 419/2008 and CA 420/2008 on 13/01/2010,

24/02/2010 and 09/06/2010 learned Additional Solicitor General raised

several objections to the application.

Learned ASG submitted that the provisions contained in Article 155

of the 1ih Amendment to the Constitution precludes the petitioner

from obtaining relief and in view of the preclusive clause of the

Constitution the petitioner cannot seek relief by way Writ jurisdiction

from this court.

Article 155 reads as follows:

It Subject to the jurisdiction conferred on the Supreme Court under

paragraph 1 of Article 126, no court or Tribunal shall have the power

or jurisdiction to inquire into, or pronounce upon or in any manner

call in question any order or decision made by the Commission or

Committee in pursuance of any power or duty, conferred or imposed on such Commission or Committee under this Chapter or under any

other law."

Learned ASG further submitted that as admitted by the petitioner an

application was filed in the Supreme Court in respect of same issue

seeking relief alleging violation of Fundamental rights under Article 12

(1) and his application was dismissed by the Supreme Court along

with other connected applications. A copy of the SC Order in SC FR

135/08 is annexed to the Statement of Objections marked 1 R5.

Thirdly the preliminary objection was raised by the respondents that

the petitioner has failed to exercise his right of Appeal to the

Administrative Appeal Tribunal under section 4 (1) of the

Administrative Appeal Tribunal Act which was an alternative remedy

available to the petitioner.

11

It was further contended that the petitioner was possessed of the

marking scheme (Pl0) at the time he presented himself for the

interview and moreover, whilst challenging the said Marking Scheme

on the same basis the petitioner relies on the same marking Scheme

to be given marks to be considered for promotion.

It appears from the documents marked 1 R3 and 1 R 4 that the 11th

to 20th respondents have obtained higher marks than the petitioner.

If the petitioners in all the applications before this court seeking

higher marks based on the same marking Scheme and promotions as

DIGs have failed to establish a legal right, are the petitioners in

these applications entitled to obtain relief from this court.

In Credit Information Bureau of Sri Lanka v Messrs Jafferjee and

Jafferjee (Pvt) ltd 2005 1 SLR at 899 His Lordship the Former Chief

Justice S.N. Silva set out the conditions to be satisfied by the

applicant in an application for a Writ of Mandamus and held that

"there is rich and profuse case law on Mandamus on the conditions to be satisfied by the applicant.

A) The applicant must have a legal right to the performance of a

legal duty by the parties against whom the Mandamus is sought ( R

v. Bamstaple Justices 1937 54 TLR 36

B) The right to be enforced must be a public right and the duty

sought to be enforced must be of a public nature

C) The foundation of Mandamus is the existence of a legal right (

Napier exparte 1852 18 UB 692 at 695.)

D) The conduct of the applicant may disentitle him to the remedy (i)

It would not be issued if the Writ would be futile in its result.

"

12

I am inclined to follow the above conditions as valid guidelines to be

satisfied by the applicant when considering granting a Writ of Mandamus.

The petitioner has to establish to the satisfaction of court that the petitioner

has a legal right to the relief and the party against whom the relief is

sought has failed to perform his public duty.

In P.S Bus Company v. Ceylon Transport Board 61 NLR 491 the court held

that

"A prerogative Writ is not issued as a matter of course and it is in the discretion of court to refuse to grant it if the facts and circumstances are such as to warrant a refusal. A writ J for instance J will not issue where it would be vexatious and futile. II

have carefully considered the objections raised by the State at the

hearing of this application and I agree with the submissions of the learned

ASG as to whether in fact, the petitioner has established a legal right in

order to obtain relief from this court.

It is to be noted that the petitioners' Fundamental Rights applications on

the same issue have been refused by the Supreme Court having carefully

considered the mark sheet which is being disputed in this application.

The petitioner in this application complains that the allocation of 30 marks for" capacity assessment in the "marking Scheme" marked P 10 is

unreasonable and leaves ample room for abuse whereas the "capacity

assessment" carried only 10 marks in the year 2006. However, it must be

noted that under capacity assessment, there were 5 other distinct criteria

namely, Personality, Leadership, Communication Skills, Application of conceptual

/ Analytical skills and Special Achievements carrying 6 marks each under

which all the candidates including the petitioners were evaluated.

Learned counsel for petitioner submitted that the allocation of 30 marks

for the criteria in P 10 is unreasonable and subjectively assessable and

vague. However, it appears from the material placed before this court that

13

all the candidates had been assessed equally on the same criteria with

the same amount of time allocation at the interview for each candidate.

It was submitted on behalf of the petitioner that the 16th and 18th

respondents who were selected at the interview and promoted over

the petitioner were very much junior in rank. However, it was the

position of the respondents that the both the 16th and 18th

respondents were promoted to the rank of Senior Superintendent of

Police on the same day as that of the petitioner.

On a careful reading of the mark sheet marked 1 R 3 it is obvious

that marks had been allocated for each category and total marks had

been given from the marks received for each category in respect of

all candidates.

It was contended by the learned ASG that the petitioner did not

object to the marking scheme and or the manner in which the

interviews were conducted and or the criteria on which the interviews

were conducted any time prior to the announcement of the selected

candidates.

It can be seen that 11th to the 20th respondents have obtained more

marks than the petitioner at the interview. And as such I do not see

that any injustice or prejudice has been caused to the petitioner at the

Interview as all the candidates have been assessed by the interview

board in good faith without any discrimination. I do not agree with

the submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioner that

the petitioners were prejudiced as marking scheme was made

known to the candidates prior to the interviews.

The respondents heavily relied on the Constitutional ouster clause in

Article 155 of the 1th Amendment to the Constitution under which

the petitioners are precluded from obtaining reliefs from this court.

14

Under Article 155 referred to above this court has no jurisdiction

to inquire into or pronounce upon or in any manner call in question

the decision of the National police Commission. It should be noted

that the ouster clauses as has been decided in a number of cases

in this court and the Supreme Court causes a bar to the entertaining

a Writ application and as such I am in agreement with the

submission of the learned ASG and uphold the objections raised by

the respondents that this court has no jurisdiction under Article 155 . The petitioners have failed to establish any malafides on the part

of the 1st to 10th respondents from not selecting the petitioners for

promotion as DIGs and I do not see any unfair treatment towards the

petitioners and or the respondents have acted outside and beyond the

powers granted by law for not granting promotions to the

petitioners as DIGs.

I am inclined to uphold the objection raised by ASG Mr. Wijetilake

that the petitioner's FR application filed on the same basis has also

been refused by the Supreme Court and the petitioner has also failed

to exercise his right of appeal against the decision of the Police

Commission to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal before seeking any

remedy by way of Writ application.

In any event, it must be stated that all four petitioners have" now

retired from police service and any reliefs sought by the petitioners

are futile and no relief can be granted to the petitioner in his favor.

The prerogative remedies such as certiorari lie where statutory

authorities wielding power vested by Parliament exercise these powers

to the detriment of a member of the public. I do not think that the 1st

to the 10th respondents acted in a prejudicial or detrimental manner to

the petitioners. It was the responsibility of the respondents to select

the most suitable candidates for the post of DIG.

15

I have carefully considered the written submissions of the parties and

material placed before this court and I reach the conclusion that the relief

sought by the petitioners cannot be granted in favour of the petitioners.

Accordingly, the petitioner's application and the connected application

nos. CA411/08, CA 419/08 and CA 420/08 are dismissed. There will be no

order for costs.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Anil Goonaratne J,

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL.