IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA C.A. No. 198/2010 HC. Badulla Case No. 156/2005

Herath Mudiyanselage Wimalarathne 52/1, Tannapita, Aluthwela North, Diyatalawa.

Accused Appellants Vs. Hon. Attorney General Attorney General's Department Colombo 12.

Respondent

C.A. 198/2010

Before

Counsel

Argued &

Decided on

H.C. Badulla Case No: 156/2005

Vijith K Malalgoda PC,J. (PICA) &

H.C.J. Madawala,J.

Neranjan Jayasinghe with Saumya Perera

for the Appellant.

H.1. Pieris SSC. for the State.

09.06.2015

*********

Vijith K. Malalgoda P.C.,J.(P/CA)

Counsel for the appellant submits that he will not be

challenging the conviction in this case but will only be canvassing

the sentence. In this case the deceased was 3 % year old child who

had died of electrocution. The prosecution version was that the

r I i

\

child who had died due to electrocution had been living in the

adjoining land of the Accused-Appellant. The Accused-Appellant

has permitted the deceased family to use their well in order to

obtain water. To help them the accused-Appellant had opened the

fence for them to come to their land. On the day in question the

deceased child who was only 3 % years old had followed the father

to this land. The father had gone to the boutique but the child

remained in this land and subsequently his body was found. The

live wire which was used for electrocution was found inside the well.

The Post Mortem Report of the child confirms that he had died of

electrocution. Counsel for the Petitioner submits that the accused

never wanted to kill this boy by electrocution. He had infact

permitted the deceased family to use their well. Therefore, learned

counsel submits that this is a fit and proper case to act leniently

on the Accused. However we are mindful of the fact that the

Accused-Appellant had laid a live wire even inside his premises with

a view either to protect his land from animals or for some other

purpose. We find that this act itself is a rash act which goes well

beyond mere matter of compensation. The Accused had contested

this case in the High Court and at the conclusion of the trial, the

learned trial Judge had imposed a custodial sentence of 3 years

Rigorous Imprisonment. However considering the submissions

made by the learned counsel and also considering the fact that the

Accused had permitted the deceased family to come into their land

with good intention to draw water from their well since the deceased

well was polluted, we are of the view, that it is not fair to impose a

custodial sentence to the Accused-Appellant. The incident had

taken place in the year 2002. Considering all these issues we decide

to reduce the sentence imposed on the Accused-Appellant to period

of two years Rigorous 1m prisonmen t . The said term of two years

Rigorous Imprisonment will be suspended for a period of 10 years.

The fine of Rs: 5000/- will be cancelled and instead we order the

Accused to pay compensation of Rs: 50,000/- to the deceased

family. If the Accused-Appellant fails to pay the said Rs: 50,000/-

we order that he be imposed a simple imprisonment of six months.

Subject to the above variation, the appeal is dismissed. The

sentence imposed on the Accused will operative from today. He is

imposed two years Rigorous Imprisonment suspended for 10 years

with compensation of Rs: 50,000/- to be paid to the deceased family

with a default term of 6 months simple imprisonemt.

Registrar is directed to return the record to the High Court of

Badulla in order to implement this order.

Appeal partly allowed.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

H C J Madawala,J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Jmrj-

! I I I ! I l , 1

\