1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made

under Section 331 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of

1979

CA 190/2010

HC/ VAVUNIYA/ 1947/2007

Nagalingam Chettiyar Kandasamy

Accused-Appellant

vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

Complainant-Respondent

BEFORE : Devika Abeyratne J

P. Kumararatnam J

COUNSEL : Mr J.Tenny C. Fernando for the Appellant.

Mr.Chethiya Goonesekera SDSG for the

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 03/02/2021

DECIDED ON : 15/03/2021

*******************

2 | P a g e

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam J

[01] The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter after referred as the

Appellant) was indicted by the Attorney General under Sections 54(A) (d)

and 54(A) (b) of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as

amended by Act No. 13 of 1984 for Possession and Trafficking respectively

of 1108.7 grams of Heroin on 08th December 2004 in the High Court of

Vavuniya.

[02] After trial the Appellant was found guilty on both counts and the Learned

High Court Judge of Vavuniya has imposed life imprisonment on both

counts on 15th of November, 2010.

[03] Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

[04] The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the

Appellant has given consent to argue this matter in his absence due to

Covid 19 pandemic.

[05] On behalf of the Appellant following Grounds of Appeal are raised.

1. The Learned Trial Judge misdirected himself by failure to

analyse the discontinuation of custody of production chain, that

is a substantial fact, the prosecution shall prove beyond

reasonable doubt and thereby the conviction is bad in law and

unsafe.

2. The Judgment of the Learned Trial Judge is not in accordance

with Section 283 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15

of 1979 on the basis that Learned High Court Judge misdirected

himself by failure to analyse defence evidence in its proper legal

context and thereby the conviction is bad in law.

3 | P a g e

[06] On 07/12/2004 IP Suresh Kumara Silva attached to Murunkan Police Station

had received information from an informant about trafficking Heroin from

Mannar to Colombo. As per the information an unidentified person

travelling in a Colombo bound bus said to have been carrying the

contraband. He with 07 other police officers attached to Murunkan Police

Station had rushed to an existing road block at Parayanlankulam junction.

While checking the buses passing by, the particular Colombo bound bus

had reached the check point at 22.45 hours.

The bus had been stopped and the officers got in to the bus and carried out

the search. While checking IP/Suresh Kumara had noticed the Appellant

who was seated on the 5th seat from the drivers seat to be suspicious. Upon

inquiry the Appellant had revealed his name and his destination. Two blue

coloured normal size bags used to carry clothes, having the word Domex

on it and one inside the other were on his lap. When this officer opened the

bags for checking found nothing but noticed the bottoms of the bags had

been unusually elevated. Having felt suspicious, when he opened the

elevated bottoms of the bags found two parcels wrapped by gum tape in

each bag. When he opened the parcels found brown coloured powder in

that parcels. As it smelled to be Heroin the Appellant was arrested and

brought to the Murunkan Police Station.

At the Murunkan Police Station the parcels had been weighed by using a

scale from police canteen. According to the police notes the first parcel

weighed 1400 grams and the second parcel weighed 1800 grams. The

parcels had been properly sealed and obtained thumb impression of the

Appellant as well. The said two parcels had been registered under

production No. 144/04 and produced to Mannar Magistrate Court with the

Appellant.

Productions had been kept in the police station under different reserve duty

officers before being taken to Magistrate Court, Mannar.

After obtaining court order, the productions had been handed over to

Government Analyst Department on 09/12/2004.

4 | P a g e

[07] The prosecution led 07 witnesses including the Government Analyst,

marked productions and closed the case. Defence was called and the

Appellant preferred to give evidence from witness box and closed the case.

[08] In his evidence the Appellant took up the position that he never carried any

bag or bags on the date of his arrest. The said bags were said to have

recovered from baggage carrier of the bus. He denied the ownership of the

same.

[09] In every criminal case the burden is on the prosecution to prove the case

beyond reasonable doubt against the accused person. In the case of this

nature the prosecution not only need to prove the case beyond reasonable

doubt but also ensure, with cogent evidence that the inward journey of the

production has not been disturbed at the all-material point.

[10] In the case of Mohamed Nimnaz V. Attorney General CA/95/94 held:

A criminal case has to be proved beyond reasonable doubt. Although

we take serious view in regard to offences relation to drugs, we are of

the view that the prosecutor should not be given a second chance to fill

the gaps of badly handled prosecutions where the identity of the good

analysis for examination has to be proved beyond reasonable doubt. A

prosecutor should take pains to ensure that the chain of events

pertaining to the productions that had been taken charge from the

Appellant from the time it was taken into custody to the time it reaches

the Government Analyst and comes back to the court should be

established.

[11] In the first ground of appeal the Appellant takes up the position that the

Learned Trial Judge misdirected himself by failure to analyse the

discontinuation of custody of production chain, that is a substantial fact, the

prosecution shall prove beyond reasonable doubt and thereby the

conviction is bad in law and unsafe.

According to chief investigation officer IP Suresh Kumara Silva, the

substance found in the possession of the Appellant was weighted using a

scale used in the police canteen. In the parcel P1-1400 grams of substance

was found and, in the parcel, P2-1800 grams of substance was found.

5 | P a g e

However, when the productions had been taken to the Government Analyst

Department a notable difference had been noted in both parcels. According

to the Government Analyst Report which had been marked as P8 in the High

Court Trial, the weight of parcel P1-mentioned as 1563 grams. This is 163

grams in excess to the original weight. The weight of parcel P2 mentioned

as 1635 grams. This is 165 grams less than the original weight. Hence the

Appellant argue that the weight difference could create a serious doubt in

the prosecution case.

[12] In Faiza Hanoon Yoosuf V.Attorney General CA/121/2002 it was held that:

In effect the first ground of appeal is that the prosecution failed to

establish the nexus between the Heroin detected and what was

produced in court. In court, the prosecution must prove the chain of

custody. This must be done by establishing the nexus between the

heroin detected and what was handed over to the Government Analyst

for examination and report. The prosecution must prove that, what was

subjected to analysis is exactly the same substance that was detected in

that particular case. In this regard the inward journey of the

production plays a dominant role and is most significant.

In Perera V. Attorney General [1998] 1 Sri.L.R it was held:

the most important journey is the inward journey because the final

analyst report will depend on that.

[13] When this Court invited the Complainant-Respondent to explain regarding

weight discrepancy transpired from the evidence, the Senior Deputy

Solicitor General following the best traditions and highest standard admitted

the weight discrepancy in the production and further added that is unable to

explain the reason.

[14] According to IP/Suresh Kumara he had handed over production to

Government Analyst Ms.Chandrani who was the 11th witness in this case. He

further added when he handed over the same to the Government Analyst

Ms.Chandrani did a sample test and confirmed that substances contained in

both parcels had been reacted for Heroin.

6 | P a g e

When Government Analyst Ms.Chandrani gave evidence, in the cross

examination she had vehemently denied that she received P1 and P2 from

PW01 IP/Suresh Kumara on 09/12/2004. She further added that on the said

date production pertaining to this case had been received by Assistant

Government Analyst Ms.Rajapaksha. No questions asked from Government

Analyst Ms.Chandrani regarding the condition of the parcels and the sample

test carried out at the time of receipt of the parcels to the Government Analyst

Department.

The prosecution has failed to place evidence with regard to the condition of

P1 and P2 when it reached the Government Analyst Department. Further the

prosecution had failed to establish as to how Ms.Rajapaksha had carried out

sample test before issuing the Government Analyst Receipt which was

marked as P3 by the prosecution.

In this case the failure to call Assistant Government Analyst Ms.Rajapaksha

has created a very serious doubt on the prosecution case.

In an identical case Albert Deny Kunja V Attorney General CA/92/2007 His

Ladyship Justice K.K.Wickramsinghe decided on 06/07/2018 held that:

However, upon perusal of the proceedings of the trial it is evident that

the prosecution witness Jayamanne had handed over the production to

one K.P Chandrani at the Government Analysts Department and the

Assistant Government Analyst had acquired production from said

K.P. Chandrani (Page 154 and 167 of the brief)

We find that one K.P.Chandrani had handled production at a

subsequent stage of inward journey and she had not been called to give

evidence. Therefore, the prosecution had failed to establish the chain of

the custody of production beyond reasonable doubt

[15] In this case the Learned High Court Judge has not considered the weight

variation in his judgment. Further not calling Assistant Government Analyst

Ms.Rajapaksha who received the production and issued the receipt, has

caused a very serious doubt on the prosecution case. As the evidence placed

by the prosecution with regard to inward journey create a serious doubt and

7 | P a g e

it certainly affect the root of the case, it is unsafe to stand the conviction

against the Appellant.

[16] In Mahasarukkalige Chandani V. Attorney General CA/213/2009 decided

on 30/06/2016 His Lordship Justice Malalgoda held that:

Since the court is not inclined to act on the evidence placed by the

prosecution in establishing the inward journey as safe, it is not

necessary for this court to consider the other grounds of the appeal

raised by the Learned counsel during the argument before us.

[17] As the prosecution had failed to establish the custody of production chain

beyond reasonable doubt, it is not necessary to consider the second ground

of appeal advanced by the Appellant.

[18] Due to aforesaid reasons, we set aside the conviction and sentence imposed

by Learned High Court Judge of Vavuniya dated 15/11/2010 on the

Appellant. Therefore, he is acquitted from both charges.

[19] Accordingly, the appeal is allowed.

[20] The Registrar is directed to send a copy of this judgment to High Court of

Vavuniya along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

DEVIKA ABEYRATNE, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL