IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

, . ~ ,'.' ") .

Case No. CA 291/2009

HC Colombo Case No. 1697/04

1

In the matter of an Application made

in terms of Section 331 (1) of the Code

of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of

1979 read with Article 138 (1) of the

Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic in Sri Lanka.

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka

COMPLAINANT

Vs

1. Saundara Durayalage Thushara

Pradeepika Jayasuriya Fernando

2. Brahmanage Ranjith Perera

3. Sinhala Pelige Dinesh

Pushpakumara Abeysinghe

ACCUSED

AND NOW

Saundara Durayalage Thushara

Pradeepika Jayasuriya Fernando

1ST ACCUSED - APPELLANT

r~"~~~~;~~.\tI..~~~~~'~~':'m~!;::tf.'~"'~~' .

1 ~ I I ~

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

Deepali Wijesundera J.

Vs

The Attorney General

Attorney Genera/'s Department

Colombo 12. RESPONDENT

: Deepali Wijesundera J.

: L.U. Jayasuriya J.

: Amila Pal\iyage for the Accused-

Appellant.

A. Jinasena S.D.S.G. for the

Respondent.

: 16th October, 2017

: 10th November, 2017

Three accused were charged in the High Court of Colombo under

Section 357, Section 356 and Section 365 (b) (a) of the Penal Code. After trial

the third accused was acquitted on all 8 charges. The first and second accused

have appealed against the conviction and sentence. The second accused

appellant had withdrawn the appeal. The instant case is the appeal of the first

accused appellant, who was convicted on all eight charges.

The story of the prosecution is that on the day in question,

prosecution witness number one Lucinda and prosecution witness

2

-

number two Richard who are British nationals have visited the Lotus Pond

in Polonnaruwa in the evening. The evidence revealed that they have

travelled to Polonnaruwa from Colombo in a van driven by prosecution

witness number five Vipula. After visiting the said pond they have gone

towards the van and have seen four persons near the van armed with

guns. When they approached the van they have noticed the men wearing

Poncho capes and had their faces covered with a cloth similar to a net.

Thereafter they have bundled the victims into the van, and they have

seen the driver Vipula at the rear of the vehicle with his hands tied.

Thereafter Richard's hands too were tied and put into the rear of the

vehicle. Lucinda was forced to sit on a seat and one of the men had driven

the vehicle for nearly five hours round the same area. On the way Lucinda

alleged that the appellant tried to have oral sex with her and thereafter

raped her. At some point of time Richard too had witness the acts.

The learned counsel of the appellant argued that the learned High

Court Judge had rejected the evidence of the complainant on the basis

that she's not a reliable witness vide page 14 of the judgment. This the

learned High Court Judge has done whilst discussing the legal principles

and not after evaluation of the evidence of the complainant. The learned

High Court Judge has properly evaluated the evidence of the complainant

later in the judgment which runs into twenty pages (page 15 to 34)

therefore we decide that the above observation of the learned High Court

3

Judge at the beginning of the judgment has no bearing on the findings

and we reject the first ground of appeal.

The learned counsel of the appellant strenuously argued that the

appellant has not been properly identified. As the virtual complainant has

stated in her evidence that at the time she approached the vehicle it was

pitch dark and raining and she has not stated as to whether there was a

light burning in the said vehicle. Whilst giving evidence Lucinda has said

when the van was moving around lights from the street lamps fell on the

van. She further testified that the appellant flashed a torch several times

to check on the driver and Richard. She has further stated that the

appellant came very closed to her and when she refused to have oral sex

he slapped her which gave her a good view of his face. Therefore we hold

that Lucinda had ample opportunity to identify the appellant and there is

no mistaken identity. Richard had specifically given reasons to remember

the face of the appellant and we find those reasons to be probable (vide

page 148 of the brief). The second ground of appeal too fails.

The learned counsel argued that the learned High Court Judge has

rejected the evidence of the appellant due to four contradictions in his

evidence which is not correct. The learned High Court Judge whilst

referring to those contradictions has analysed the evidence of the

4

i It t J t

f

t I t I I I

t r I ! f t i II

I

"'~'~~'f"""''''''''<'''''''*",' """,,',;,' ;., ",,",,,',' "":";,;",:,'i<.-' ;'::<;;;';',;','\;;;;:';',c':'c') , \, 1"'..; ;,,;,,~L'::',

..

appellant at length vide pages 78, 79, 80 and 81 of the brief. It appears

from the brief (vide pages 81 and 82 of the brief) that the learned High

Court Judge has evaluated evidence of the defence witness who was the

brother of the appellant.

I hold that Lucinda had ample time and opportunity to identity the

appellant. In 1983 AIR SC 957 Macchi Singh and others vs State of

Punjab it was held "that the eye sight can get accustomed to the condition

or the situation". In this case it was a lantern in the instant case it was an

electric torch and the street lamps which shed light.

For the afore stated reasons we are not inclined to set aside the

judgment dated 09/12/2009 of the High Court of Colombo. We affirm the

said judgment and dismiss the appeal.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

L.U. Jayasuriya J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

5

l rII: t i Ii j II t f ! t

! , I I if I

f I ! ! I I I

! t I f ! I