==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for Orders in the nature of Writs of Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus under Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Lanka Securities (Private) Limited, No. 228/1, Galle Road, Colombo 04. CA (Writ) App. No. 326/2019

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. Colombo Stock Exchange

2. Professor Jeeva Niriella,

Chairperson of the Dispute Resolution Committee. 3. Ray Abeywardene,

A member of the Dispute Resolution Committee. 4. Anton Godfrey,

A member of the Dispute Resolution Committee. 5. Shanil Fernando,

A member of the Dispute Resolution Committee. 6. Renuke Wijewardhane,

Chairman of the Panel of Inquiry of the 2nd Defendant- Colombo Stock Exchange.

2

7. Renu Ranatunge (Ms),

A member of the Panel of Inquiry of the 2nd Defendant- Colombo Stock Exchange. 8. Kanishka Munasinghe (Ms),

A member of the Panel of Inquiry of the 2nd Defendant- Colombo Stock Exchange. The addresses of all the above Respondents No.04-01, West Tower, World Trade Cente, Echelon Square, Colombo 01.

9. Biren Molamure,

Representative of N.R. Molamure (Mrs), (Deceased), No. 57, Gangaboda Road, Piliyandala.

RESPONDENTS

Before: Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Counsel:

W.R.J. Peiris instructed by C.K. Rannulu for the Petitioner.

Avindra Rodrigo, P.C., with K. Jayaweera instructed by FJ & G de Saram for the 1st to

8th Respondents.

Nigel Bartholomeuz with Aslesha Weerasekera and Aaruran Nanthagobalan instructed

by V.W. Kularatn Associates for the 9th Respondent.

Argued on: 13.02.2026 & 31.03.2026

Delivered on: 05.08.2026

3

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Judgement

Introduction

The Petitioner is ‘Lanka Securities Limited’, which is a body corporate incorporated under the

Companies Act, No. 7 of 2007, and it can sue and be sued in its corporate name. It mainly

engages in the business of stock brokering, investment consulting and advising, buying and

selling shares in the share market, and maintaining accounts as a broker for its customers. It

has a license to engage in the share market of the Colombo Stock Exchange, which is the 1st

Respondent, who is also incorporated under Act No. 7 of 2007 and can sue and be sued in its

corporate name, and from time-to-time it promulgates rules with regard to the functions and

businesses thereof; it is governed by the rules and regulations issued by the Security Exchange

Commission (SEC), which is also incorporated under the Security and Exchange Commission

Act, No. 36 or 1987 (as amended) (hereinafter referred to as the “SEC Act”).

The 2nd to 5th Respondents are Members of the 1st Respondent Board of Directors, who the

Petitioner alleges has taken the decision against the Petitioner, whilst the 6th to 8th Respondents

are the Members of the Panel of Inquiry appointed by the 1st Respondent to inquire into the

allegations made by the 9th Respondent, who is a customer or client of the Petitioner.

After the issuance of formal notice, the 1st to 8th and 9th Respondents have filed their respective

Objections, and they have denied the allegations levelled against them by the Petitioner and

moved for the dismissal of this Application. I will refer to the Objections in detail in the body

of this judgement.

This came up for Argument before me on 13.02.2026 and 31.03.2026, and in addition to the

oral submissions made by the counsel for the Petitioner and the 1st and 9th Respondents, they

4

have filed their respective written submissions, elaborating their oral submissions; hence, this

judgement.

The Petitioner’s position

The Petitioner asserts that, as a stockbroker, it is engaged in the business of stock brokering,

and in advising its customers on when to purchase and sell their shares, maintaining their

accounts, and buying and selling shares on behalf of them in the share market. The Petitioner

further asserts that it has a license to be engaged in the platform of the share market run by the

1st Respondent, and for that purpose, the 1st Respondent has promulgated certain rules that

apply to the conduct of the businesses and procedures thereof; such rules are marked as P7

annexed to the Petition.

The Petitioner further asserts that the 9th Respondent had been one of its customers, who had

engaged the Petitioner and made use of the Petitioner’s service to invest in the share market

while maintaining an account called Central Depository System (CDS) Account with the

Petitioner. The Petitioner further asserts that the 9th Respondent had invested in shares and sold

and purchased shares while investing so in the share market, and during the during the course,

she had experienced loses and gains due to such purchases and sales of shares.

The Petitioner further asserts that the 9th Respondent had already being an investor in the share

market, prior to commencing her business through the Petitioner, through a different broker

named ‘Somerville Stock Broker (Private) Limited’, and therefore, she had a lot of experience

in investing in the share market. Thus, she was well aware about the procedures and conduct

of businesses that took place in the share market through stockbrokers.

However, by letter marked as P9 and dated 07.04.2017, the 9th Respondent had made a

complaint to the 1st Respondent against certain transactions conducted and made by the

Petitioner for and on behalf of the 9th Respondent, and the Petitioner asserts that such complaint

5

should not have been made directly to the 1st Respondent before taking up the issue with the

compliance officer appointed in that behalf attached to the Petitioner. Additionally, the

Petitioner alleges that the 1st Respondent had accepted the said complaint and thereafter, by

covering letter P10, dated 15.05.2017, informed the Petitioner about the complaint and called

for the Petitioner’s observations.

The Petitioner states that, though the 9th Respondent made a complaint to the 1st Respondent

against certain transactions conducted by the Petitioner on behalf of the 9th Respondent, the

Petitioner asserts that such complaints should not have been made.

The Petitioner further asserts that it had express authority from Mrs. Biren Molamure, the 9th

Respondent, to trade in shares in her account using the skill and judgment of the Petitioner,

which was also followed by and approved by the 9th Respondent, Mrs. Biren Molamure. At all

times, she was aware of the transactions conducted by the Petitioner. Further, until she disputed

the transactions by P9, she had never disputed any transaction conducted by the Petitioner with

the authority of Mrs. Biren Molamure, the 9th Respondent.

Thereafter, the Petitioner submitted its observations by letter dated 22.05.2017; the said letter

is marked as P11. In addition to that, the letter was submitted together with certain annexures

marked as P11(a) to P11(j), which are annexed to the Petition.

The Petitioner further pleads that the said annexures establish affirmatively that the investment

advisor, Mr. Kapila Bandara, who performed duties on behalf of the Petitioner, had prudently

kept Mrs. Molamure, the 9th Respondent, duly informed at all times of the activities and

performance of her account and, in fact, had obtained her written acknowledgment and

approval for the transactions in the manner in which they had been carried out.

6

Further, the Petitioner asserts that the annexures to P11, marked as P11(d), P11(e), P11(g),

and P11(h), are several documents manually signed by the 9th Respondent, Mrs. Molamure,

and handed over to the 1st Respondent at the inquiry.

Consequent to the said observations, a Panel of Inquiry was appointed by the 1st Respondent,

in which the 6th to 8th Respondents were members. There had been several items of

correspondence and meetings between the parties, and finally the Petitioner alleges that the

Panel of Inquiry made its determination dated 01.10.2018, which is produced as P6(b).

Thereafter, the Petitioner lodged an appeal against the said determination before the Dispute

Resolution Committee, of which the 2nd Respondent is the Chairman and the 3rd to 5th

Respondents are members.

Consequent to the said appeal lodged by the Petitioner on 01.11.2018, the Dispute Resolution

Committee held discussions on 09.01.2019.

Having heard the Petitioner both orally and in writing, as well as the 9th Respondent, the

Dispute Resolution Committee made its determination dated 04.06.2019, which is marked as

P6(a). The Dispute Resolution Committee affirmed the determination of the Panel of Inquiry

dated 01.10.2018, marked as P6(b). The Petitioner challenges both those determinations by

this Application and seeks to quash the said determinations.

The Respondents’ Objections

According to the Objections of the 1st to 8th Respondents, the 1st Respondent is a body corporate

incorporated under the laws of Sri Lanka, and it has derived its powers in terms of Section

13(a) of the Securities and Exchange Commission Act, No. 36 of 1987. It further asserts that

the Security Exchange Commission (SEC) is empowered with the powers germane to all

securities and the share market of Sri Lanka, and the 1st Respondent has been licensed by the

Security Exchange Commission as a body corporate who operates the share market in Sri

7

Lanka. Further, it asserts that the 2nd to 5th Respondents are its Members of the Board of

Directors at the time the inquiry took place on the complaint made by the 9th Respondent.

Further, the 1st Respondent avers that in terms of Section 13(b) of the Securities and Exchange

Commission Act, the Petitioner is licensed by the Security Exchange Commission to carry on

the business of a stockbroker, who also places a vital role in the stock market.

In addition to the rules and regulations made under the Securities Exchange Commission Act,

for the purpose of conducting its affairs, the 1st Respondent has promulgated certain rules under

the authority that it derives from Section 24 of the SEC Act. The said rules are marked as X2,

and the Petitioner is a member of the 1st Respondent who operates as a provider of the platform

to operate the share market.

Accordingly, it is the position of the 1st Respondent that in addition to the articles of association

of the 1st Respondent as a body corporate, it is governed by the rules and regulations made

under the SEC Act by the Securities Exchange Commission, as well as the provisions of the

Securities Exchange Commission Act, No. 36 of 1987.

Further, it is asserted that the Security Exchange Commission, being the body corporate

incorporated under the SEC Act, is a necessary party for the purpose of this Application;

therefore, they raised a preliminary objection as to the maintainability of this Application

without the SEC being a party to this Application.

The next objection raised is that the nexus between the Petitioner and the 1st Respondent is the

membership of the Petitioner being a member of the 1st Respondent; thus, since it is of

contractual nature, no writ lies as no public law element is involved therein.

In addition to that, it is the position of the 1st Respondent that since there certain questions of

facts are involved and the parties are of variance of those facts, the Writ Court is not the forum

8

for the Petitioner to urge its grievance to obtain relief based on those facts; therefore, this

Application should be dismissed in limine.

In addition to that, it is the position of the 1st Respondent that the 9th Respondent, who is a

customer and an investor of securities in the share market through the Petitioner who is a

stockbroker, had maintained a CDS Account bearing No. LSL305352080VN/00 with the

Petitioner. However, the 9th Respondent has made a complaint to the SEC directly, with a copy

to the 1st Respondent, against the Petitioner and certain officers of the Petitioner, mainly based

on the deflation of her account, which as at 31.12.2014 was about Rs. 8,394,524/- and had

come down to Rs. 100,000/- as at 31.12.2016. The transactions that had taken place during that

time through her account was without her knowledge and her express sanction or authorisation,

and she has also not been kept informed of the transactions that had taken place through and

under her account; therefore, she had made allegations to inquire into the matter. The said copy

of the letter is marked as X2 annexed to the objections.

After receiving the same, the 1st Respondent has responded to the said complaint informing the

9th Respondent to refer the matter to the compliance officer of the 1st Respondent, to whom the

investor of a broker company should first refer its disputes of any transaction within three

months of such transaction taking place, in terms of Rule 10.1 of the Rules of X2; the said

response letter is marked as X4.

However, in reply to the said letter X4, the 9th Respondent had written a letter indicating that

she has no trust in the Petitioner or its officers as there was unauthorised transactions that had

taken place under her account; as such, she has lost her investment, and therefore, she sought

an early investigation into the matter. The said letter and the reply thereto marked as X6 and

X7 annexed to the respectively Statement of Objections.

9

Thereafter, by X8 (which is the same letter marked as P10 annexed to the Petition), the 1st

Respondent had called for observation of the Petitioner. The Petitioner had given its

observations by P11, and there are certain documents annexed to P11.

Thereafter, the Chairman of the 1st Respondent had appointed a panel of inquirers, who are the

6th to 8th Respondents, to inquire into the matter in terms of Rule 10.3 of X2. Accordingly, the

parties were informed of the same; however, the 9th Respondent, by letter marked as X9

annexed to the Statement of Objections, informed the 1st Respondent that she is unable to

physically attend any meeting or inquiry since she was asked by her doctor to bed rest, and in

addition to that, she has further indicated that there is no person of family in Sri Lanka to attend

the meeting of the Committee who is aware of the transactions that had taken place or the

business of the 9th Respondent engaged with the Petitioner.

Thereafter, the Members of the Panel of Inquiry (the 6th to 8th Respondents) decided to have

online meetings with the Petitioner; accordingly, the Petitioner was informed of the same.

Thereafter, the 1st Respondent states that the 6th to 8th Respondents had agreed to connect the

complainant (the 9th Respondent) to the meetings via conference, and the same was

communicated to the Petitioner and the complainant; the said document is marked as P12(b).

The first meeting between the parties presided over by the 6th to 8th Respondents was held on

11.08.2017, at the office of the 1st Respondent, and in order to obtain further clarifications

regarding the complaint against the Petitioner, the Petitioner was represented by its CEO,

compliance officer, and relevant investment officer one Mr. Kapila Bandara, who were

physically present at the meeting while the complainant 9th Respondent was only connected

via conference calls. According to the Petitioner, the procedures adopted were approved by the

Board of Directors of the 1st Respondent; therefore, such meetings were required to be recorded

by the 1st Respondent, and proper minutes had to be kept and obtain confirmation of the parties

10

by signing each and every page of the minutes. Accordingly, the 6th Respondent, by way of a

letter dated 08.09.2017 and annexed to the Petition marked as P12(e), shared the minutes of

the meeting with the complainant and the Petitioner for confirmation of the matters recorded

therein, and the Petitioner by way of her letter dated 06.10.2017 and marked as P15 annexed

to the Petition, confirmed each and every page of the minutes. Later, on behalf of the 9th

Respondent, the same has been confirmed and marked as P22 annexed to the Petition.

At the meeting so held in responding to the allegation made by the complainant, the following

matters were mentioned by the Petitioner;

(1) The complainant had authorised the Petitioner to hold proceeds of sales of transactions

carried out in her securities account by the letter dated 11.02.2014.

(2) By way of the letter dated 10.01.2014, the complainant authorised the investment

advisor Mr. Kapila Bandara of the Petitioner, to carry out transactions in her account

according to his discretion.

(3) Again, by letter dated 10.01.2014, the complainant further agreed to extend credit to

the Petitioner to carry out transactions.

(4) The investment advisor, Mr. Kapila Bandara, obtained the complainant’s consent and

approval over phone for several transactions.

However, the Petitioner informed at the said meeting that they would submit all the telephone

conversations that had taken place between Mr. Kapila Bandara and the complainant (9th

Respondent), authorising the transactions that had taken place during the period concerned.

The Members of the Committee, the 6th to 8th Respondents, informed them that such recordings

should be submitted with the confirmation of the service provider as to the time and authenticity

thereof. However, no such document was submitted by the Petitioner for the perusal of the

Committee.

11

Thereafter, the Committee had sent a reminder, and then the Petitioner had submitted a

document which is marked as P15 annexed to the Petition, stating that they are not in a position

to submit the said documents.

Thereafter, it is the position of the 1st Respondent that the complainant by way of letter annexed

to the Petition and marked as P16, requested the balance portfolio in her securities account and

remit the sales proceedings by way of a cheque. The Petitioner thereafter informed the

complainant, by way of a letter marked as P17, that a cheque for a sum of Rs. 155,809.55 was

sent to the complainant upon selling the balance portfolio of the complainant’s securities.

In the meantime, the 9th Respondent, by way of the letter dated 04.10.2017 addressed to the 6th

Respondent, informed that she will await the response of the Petitioner to the letter marked as

P16 and revert to the 6th Respondent should she require further action with regard to the

complaint; the true copy of the said letter dated 04.10.2017 is marked as X10 annexed to the

Statement of Objections.

Thereafter, the 6th Respondent has inquired from the 9th Respondent by the letter marked as

P18 annexed to the Petition, and sought clarification, and she has responded that she wishes to

pursue her complaint against the Petitioner. Accordingly, the 6th to 8th Respondents decided to

hold the second meeting with the parties in order to seek further clarification on the dispute.

Accordingly, on 27.04.2018, with the participation of the representatives of the Petitioner and

the 9th Respondent, the second meeting had been conducted; the minutes are marked as X11

annexed to the Statement of Objections.

Thereafter, according to the findings of the Committee in their final report which is marked as

P6(b) annexed to the Petition, which the Petitioner seeks a Writ of Certiorari to quash the same,

the 6th to 8th Respondents came to the following findings and determination;

12

(i) The 9th Respondent securities account maintained with the Petitioner is not a

discretionary account, and there was no discretionary power authorising the Petitioner

or any of its officers, including Mr. Kapila Bandara, given by any letter.

(ii) Some of the letters produced by the Petitioner were fabricated which were said to have

been sent by the 9th Respondent (the complainant).

(iii)The Petitioner has violated the rules in all the transactions that took place during the

period of 2014 to 2016.

(iv) There was a delay on the part of the 9th Respondent to make a formal complaint, and

the delay was due to the fact that she was misled by the officers of the Petitioner; thus,

the compliance with Rule 3.1 can be waved off by the Committee and the Board of

Directors.

(v) Therefore, they have come to the finding against the Petitioner.

The 9th Respondent has also filed her Statement of Objections, and according to it, similar

preliminary objections thereof 1st to 8th Respondents have been taken with the regard to the

maintainability of this action, including the jurisdiction of this Court, and in view of the

arbitration clause, it is the position of the 9th Respondent that the matter should be referred to

arbitration.

Further, it is the 9th Respondent’s position that she had never authorised any transactions during

the time of December 2014 to December 2016; despite all that, since there was a depletion in

her account, and later having realised that there is depletion in her account, she had made a

formal complaint to the SEC with a copy to the 1st Respondent, and thereafter, the Panel of

Inquiry was appointed; after inquiry, it was found that the Petitioner has violated the rules

promulgated by the 1st Respondent in conducting the affairs of the Petitioner in addition to the

violation of the SEC Act. Therefore, the Petitioner has no right to obtain any relief from this

Court, and thus, moved for the dismissal of this Application.

13

In support of the averments, the 9th Respondent has marked documents 9R1 to 9R13. Since

most of them are similar documents to that of the 1st to 8th Respondents and the Petitioner, to

store away the repetition, I shall refrain from elaborating them in detail for the present case;

however, I will consider and deal with them in the following paragraphs of this judgement.

In view of the matters averred in the Petition, the matters averred in the Objections filed by the

1st to 8th Respondents and the 9th Respondent respectively, the Counter-Affidavits filed by the

Petitioner.

Arguments

The thrust of the main argument advanced by Mr. Peiris was that N.R. Molamure, who was the

client of the Petitioner, should have taken up the issue or dispute initially with the Petitioner in

terms of Rule 10.1 of the Rules marked as P7 annexed to the Petition.

The second matter advanced was that N.R. Molamure was well-versed in the transactions that

had taken place, and therefore, was well-aware about what was taking place, as an experienced

investor; thus, if she has not taken up any issue within seven days, with the Compliance Officer

of the Petitioner, she is barred from taking up that issue later because there was a belated

complaint made by her. Therefore, P6(a) and P6(b) are not tenable in law.

Further, Mr. Peiris argued that the Panel of Inquiry had ignored all the above-mentioned

evidence and came to the erroneous conclusion; the Panel had also ignored the fact that the

benefit of doubt should be given to the Petitioner of this Application against whom the

complaint was made by Mrs. Molamure.

The main argument of Mr. Rodrigo, P.C., is that the authenticity of P11(h) is in question

because when P11(h) is compared with other documents, particularly X3 and X5, the name

14

and signature are different; therefore, he argued that it is a fabricated document produced for

this case.

Associating with the submissions advanced by Mr. Rodrigo, Mr. Bartholomeuz, the learned

Counsel for the 9th Respondent argued that the Petitioner has violated Rules 3.5.1 and 3.5.3 of

the Rules contained in X2; therefore, there was a serious question to be looked into.

In addition to that, since there was no agreement between N.R. Molamure and the Petitioner,

to operate the CDS Account as a discretionary account, the Petitioner has violated Rule 7.1.2

of the Rules X2.

Furthermore, it is his submission that the Petitioner has violated Rule 11.1.1 as well.

In reply, Mr. Peiris, learned Counsel, moved Court that, in view of the preliminary objections

raised by Counsel for the Respondents in respect of both his appeals, Court may exercise the

revisionary powers conferred on it in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution.

In certain instances where serious questions of law are involved, it is his argument that Courts

have also exercised their revisionary powers even when no revision application has been

properly filed.

By way of their Written Submissions, they have elaborated on the above-mentioned arguments.

Issues arisen

In the view of the above-mentioned facts as pleaded in the Petition and the Statements of

Objections of the respective Respondents, and the arguments advanced orally and in writing,

the following questions arise for my consideration;

15

(I) Has the Petitioner violated the rules contained in the Rules X2 promulgated by the 1st

Respondent in the conduct of its affairs, in handling the investment account of Mrs.

Molamure bearing No. LSL305352080VN/00?

(II) Has the Petitioner transacted without the authorization or sanction expressly given by

Mrs. Molamure?

(III) Has Mrs. Molamure made a complaint in that regard?

(IV) Are the findings in the report marked as P6(b) justified?

(V) Has the Petitioner mishandled the funds in relation to the investment account of Mrs.

Molamure without any sanction or without informing her in due course?

(VI) Was the complaint made by Mrs. Molamure a belated one?

(VII) When the 6th to 8th Respondents conducted the inquiry, have they violated any Rules or

the rules of natural justice in arriving at their findings and conclusions in report P6(b)?

(VIII) Is the Petitioner guilty of violating the Rules by treating the account of Mrs. Molamure

as a discretionary account without any express authorization or sanction in that behalf?

(IX) Is document P6(a) tenable in law?

Issues to be determined

I will summarise the above-mentioned issues into three main questions;

(i) Whether the Petitioner has violated the Rules contained in X2.

(ii) Whether the Committee, comprising of the 6th to 8th Respondents, had violated the

Rules contained in X2.

(iii)If the answer to the question above is in the affirmative, whether the decision of the 6th

to 8th Respondents contained in P6(b) is justified.

(iv) If the answer to the above question is also in the affirmative, whether the dismissal of

the appeal by the Dispute Resolution Committee is justified.

16

Accordingly, I will first deal with the question of whether there was violation of rules by the

Petitioner.

Violation of Rules in X2 by the Petitioner

I will deal with the issues raised above and the events that transpired, in their chronological

order.

By April 2017, Mrs. Molamure, who was born in the year 1930, was 87 years old. She made a

formal complaint in writing dated 05.04.2017 to the Securities and Exchange Commission,

with a copy to the 1st Respondent, stating that the CDS (Central Depository System) Account

that she maintained with the Petitioner had dwindled. The reason attributed by her for such a

state of affairs was the unauthorized transactions carried out by the Petitioner, being her

stockbroker, through the Central Depository System Account that the 9th Respondent

maintained with the Petitioner. Therefore, she wanted justice to be done. The said complaint is

marked as P9 along with the Petition, and the 9th Respondent has also marked the same as

9R4(a), which the 1st Respondent has also marked as X3.

The 1st Respondent, by letter dated 12.04.2017, marked as X4 and annexed to the Statement of

Objections of the 1st to 8th Respondents, advised Mrs. Molamure to lodge a written complaint

with the Compliance Officer of the Petitioner if she had not already made such a complaint,

with reference to Rule 10.1 of the Stockbrokers Rules, which is marked as X2 along with the

1st to 8th Respondents’ Objections.

However, by letter dated 03.05.2017, Mrs. Molamure wrote to the Head of Legal of the 1st

Respondent, requesting him to do the needful since she did not have trust in the Petitioner or

its officers. She further stated that the ‘deliberations with the Petitioner had not been truthful’;

the said letter is marked as X5 annexed to the Objections of the 1st to 8th Respondent.

17

Thereafter, there was correspondence between the 1st Respondent and the 9th Respondent, Mrs.

Molamure. The 1st Respondent then appointed a Panel of Inquiry in terms of the Stockbrokers

Rules by P10 on 15.05.2017. Thereafter, the Chairman of the said Panel called upon the

Petitioner for its observations on the complaint, and the said letter is marked as P10.

The Petitioner, by document P11 annexed to the Petition dated 02.05.2017, responded with its

observations to P10 and its annexures, P11(a) to P11(i). The most important letter annexed to

the said observations is marked as P11(h), on which I will make my observations because it is

the vital letter that all the parties, including the Panel and the Appellate Body, made use of in

holding against the Petitioner.

Thereafter, the Chairman of the Panel wrote to Mrs. Molamure and requested that she appoint

a representative with a clear understanding of the events as reflected in X8 annexed to the

Objections of the 1st to 8th Respondent. However, Mrs. Molamure responded to the said letter

by letter dated 31.07.2017, stating that there was nobody in Sri Lanka to attend to these matters

personally and physically. She further stated that she was also unable to attend, since she had

been advised by her doctors to have bed rest due to her illness and old age; this letter is marked

as X9 annexed to the Objections.

Thereafter, the Chairman of the Panel, by letter dated 10.08.2017, responded to Mrs. Molamure

and requested that she make herself available for a conference call while the Panel was

conducting its meetings. Accordingly, to commence the meeting, Mrs. Molamure and the

Petitioner were informed by letter dated 10.08.2017 to be available for the first meeting to be

held on 11.08.2017.

Mrs. Molamure attended the said meeting by way of a conference call. However, on the other

hand, the Petitioner was represented by several employees of the Petitioner, including Mr.

18

Kapila Bandara, who was mainly involved in the transactions of Mrs. Molamure’s CDS

Account as the adviser and employee of the Petitioner.

The inquiry was thereafter conducted, and the inquiry notes were circulated to both the

Petitioner and Mrs. Molamure, the complainant. Thereafter, Mrs. Molamure confirmed the

inquiry notes by signing each and every page, and the Petitioner also signed the said inquiry

notes and minutes on each and every page. Thereafter, there had been further correspondence,

and at the same time, the Chairman of the Panel requested both parties, namely Mrs. Molamure

and the Petitioner, to attend another meeting.

Another meeting was to be held on 27.04.2018. The said notices therein are marked as P21 and

P22 annexed to the Petition. Thereafter, on 27.04.2018, the said meeting was held, and by letter

dated 10.05.2018, Mrs. Molamure wrote to the Chairman of the Panel making clarifications

regarding her position in respect of the complaint made by her.

The minutes of the said meeting was confirmed by Mrs. Molamure on 28.05.2018, and the

same was also confirmed by the Petitioner.

Thereafter, by its report marked as P6(b), dated 06.10.2018, the Panel came to certain findings.

The first finding was that the Petitioner had transacted through the CDS Account maintained

by Mrs. Molamure, without her consent and authorisation, though they claim that they had

received expressed authorisation to do so. As such, Mrs. Molamure was unaware of the

transactions that took place during the time of 09.01.2014 to 31.12.2016, and thus, Mrs.

Molamure, the 9th Respondent, is not liable for any outstanding balance that had arisen in the

CDS Account maintained by her with the Petitioner. The Panel further found that the Petitioner,

being the stockbroker, is required to reinstate the portfolio in the CDS Account of the

complainant as at 09.01.2014, since there had been transactions consisting of certain alleged

purchases and sales during the period between January 2014 and December 2016. The Panel

19

further held that the Petitioner, being the stockbroker firm, is required to pay compensation and

the balance due to the complainant as a result of such actions from January 2014, amounting

to Rs. 4,030,863.78/-.

According to the sequence of events that I have enumerated above, the first complaint was

made by Mrs. Molamure. However, during the inquiry, among the stands taken by the

Petitioner;

(1) Without making a complaint directly to the Compliance Officer of the Petitioner with

regard to the issues concerning the Petitioner and her account, she had directly made

the complaint to the Securities and Exchange Commission with a copy to the 1st

Respondent. Therefore, according to the Petitioner, she had violated the first step

required to be taken.

(2) The Petitioner also contended that the complaint made by her was belated, since, if at

all, it had to be made within three months from the date of the dispute.

(3) Mrs. Molamure had authorised the Petitioner to use its discretion by the letter marked

as P11(h), and therefore the CDS Account operated in the name of Mrs. Molamure had,

from that time onwards, been treated as a discretionary account. Therefore, the

Petitioner used its discretion in carrying out the transactions.

Therefore, it was very necessary for the Panel, at the outset, to decide whether it was a

discretionary account or not. However, in the course of the inquiry, Mrs. Molamure flatly

denied that she had ever authorized the Petitioner or any of its officers to use their discretion

in dealing with the transactions relating to her account. In fact, she also flatly denied that she

had ever signed or authorized the signature appearing in P11(h).

However, the Panel of Inquiry, having compared her signature appearing in the other

documents, noted that Mrs. Molamure had never signed in the manner in which she was said

20

to have signed in P11(h). The word "Molamure" was spelt therein as "Mulumure", which she

had never used. In fact, her correct name is "Molamure". Therefore, she had never signed using

the spelling "Mulumure", and even below the signature it is mentioned as "Mulumure". She

denied that fact, and the Panel of Inquiry also noted the same.

In fact, the learned Counsel for the 9th Respondents heavily relied upon the signature, and it

was his position that P11(h) was a fabricated document when compared with the other

documents. Further, I also noted those facts. In addition to that, it was the submission of learned

Counsel Mr. Bartholomeuz that "Molamure" is not an ordinary name; it is a very famous name

written in the annals of the history of this country, and it cannot be misspelt as "Mulumure".

Further, it is pointed out that Mrs. N.R. Molamure, the 9th Respondent, is a scion of the

Molamure family of the Sabaragamuwa Province. Therefore, she would never have misspelt

her own name, being an educated lady who studied at Bishop's College, Colombo, and who

had handled share transactions and investments for many years. In fact, the learned Counsel

for the Petitioner, Mr. Peiris, also conceded that it has been mentioned in the Petition that she

is well versed in such transactions.

However, it appears that, due to Mrs. N.R. Molamure’s old age, the officers of the Petitioner

had attempted to exploit that situation. It further appears that they had fabricated that document

by drawing a signature and producing it at the inquiry in order to show that Mrs. Molamure

had given authorization to use her CDS account as a discretionary account.

In all these circumstances, it is very clear that the Petitioner and its officers have committed a

fraud by acting without instructions in dealing with the CDS account maintained by Mrs.

Molamure. They appear to have done so, probably due to her old age, with the intention of

taking her money fraudulently.

21

In my view, when compared with the signatures appearing in document X3 and X5 (the

complaint, and the letter sent to the Head of Legal of the 1st Respondent), and the other

documents, it is my view that she would never have signed using the spelling "N.R. Mulamure"

but signed as "Molamure". Therefore, P11 (g) and P11(h) appears to me to be a fabricated

documents to establish the Petitioner’s defence. To establish that such documents were in fact,

signed by Mrs. Molamure, the burden lies upon the Petitioner in terms of Section 103 of the

Evidence Ordinance.

This is because Mrs. Molamure has flatly denied signing the said document, and it is a

document not signed by her. The different spelling of her well-known family name,

"Molamure", indicates that the Petitioner and its officers had misspelt it in P11(h) and had not

obtained the signature of the true owner of the signature. Therefore, it is not the signature of

Mrs. Molamure. Accordingly, I hold that it is a P11(g) and P11(h) documents fabricated for

the purpose of this case. I hold that Mrs. Molamure has never signed the documents marked as

P11(g), and particularly P11(h).

Therefore, the alleged authorisation said to have been given by Mrs. Molamure by P11(h) is

not a proper authorisation, and there was no valid authorisation.

In addition to the above, the Petitioner heavily relied upon the telephone conversations

contemporaneously recorded by it in order to establish that Mrs. Molamure had authorized and

sanctioned the Petitioner to exercise its discretion in carrying out the transactions. However,

none of those telephone conversations produced by the Petitioner were authenticated by the

relevant service provider; despite the Petitioner undertook to produce authenticated records,

the Petitioner has failed to do so. Therefore, it must be noted that those telephone conversations

have not been properly established, and the Petitioner has failed to produce authenticated

recordings certified by the service provider.

22

Therefore, it is my view that the Panel correctly came to the conclusion that the transactions

which took place from February 2014 until 31.12.2016 were unauthorised transactions and

were illegally carried out flouting the relevant Rules contained in X2.

Accordingly, the findings and conclusions reached by the Panel of Inquiry, of which the 6th to

8th Respondents were members, as contained in report P6(b), are fully justified and were

correctly arrived at.

Accordingly, the issues that I have raised above are answered in the affirmative in favour of

the 9th Respondent and the 1st Respondent.

The 1st Respondent flouted Rules

The next issue that I have raised is whether the 1st Respondent has flouted any Rules or deviated

from any applicable Rules in X2 by entertaining a complaint made by Mrs. Molamure directly,

or by appointing the Panel and the manner in which it conducted the inquiry.

As mentioned above, and as contended by the 1st Respondent and the 9th Respondent, the initial

complaint was made by Mrs. Molamure to the Securities and Exchange Commission, with a

copy being forwarded to the 1st Respondent. The 1st Respondent, being the service provider for

the share market platform, has promulgated Rules X2, annexed to the Objections. However,

only a part thereof has been annexed by the Petitioner to his Petition in an attempt to bring the

matter within the ambit of Rule 3.1 only, solely to demonstrate that Mrs. Molamure should

have taken the initiative of lodging her complaint with the Compliance Officer attached to the

Petitioner. Nevertheless, the Petitioner has failed to annex the other relevant Rules to the

Petition. Thereby, the Petitioner has also thereby flouted the Court of Appeal Rules

promulgated in 1990, which are applicable. However, be it as it is now, I will come to the facts

of the case.

23

The 1st Respondent referred Mrs. Molamure to make a formal complaint with the Compliance

Officer in terms of Rule 10.1 by X4. However, Mrs. Molamure responded to the said request

by the letter marked as X5 dated 03.05.2017, indicating that her efforts with the Petitioner were

not fruitful and that she did not have any trust in them or their officers therein. Therefore, she

wanted to directly handle the complaint with the 1st Respondent or the Securities and Exchange

Commission and demanded justice. Thereafter, after corresponding with the parties, the 1st

Respondent decided to appoint a Panel of Inquiry, of which the 6th to 8th Respondents were

members.

Accordingly, the Panel wrote to both parties, and both parties were available for the inquiry.

Therefore, deviating from the Rules that the complainant should first make the complaint to

the Compliance Officer, in this case, it has not prejudiced the Petitioner, nor was there any bias

in favour of Mrs. Molamure. This was because her complaint was of a serious nature, and even

the Compliance Officer attached to the Petitioner was someone in whom she did not have trust,

being an officer attached to the Petitioner.

Therefore, finally, as the Petitioner is a member operating under the 1st Respondent, it is

governed by the Rules marked as X2. Therefore, it is the finding that the 1st Respondent was

entitled to take action against the Petitioner.

Accordingly, the 1st Respondent took steps to appoint the Panel. The Petitioner never

complained against such appointment, and in fact, the Petitioner submitted to its jurisdiction

its position, and its officers were physically available, including Mr. Bandara, who was mainly

responsible for the transactions in question. They attended the two meetings, signed each and

every page of the minutes, and confirmed the said minutes.

Based on the minutes recorded, the Panel came to the conclusions and findings contained in

P6(b). Therefore, it is my view that there was no serious deviation, and no flouting of the rules

24

of natural justice. As such, it is my view that the Panel was justified in arriving at the said

conclusion.

Though the Panel has recommended to impose the reimbursement of the lost money to Mrs.

N.R. Molamure or her successor, it is my view that the Panel should have considered

recommending some measures against the Petitioner and its officers, preventing them from

committing such offences in the future, since a broker is a professional job engaged by a body

corporate, that not only handle the CDS Account for the investor for mere commission or profit;

there should be absolute trust. If such brokers are in breach of such trust, it undermines the

whole system. This trust has been violated by the Petitioner.

Dismissal of the Appeal

It was the decision of the Dispute Resolution Committee, on the appeal made by the Petitioner

against the decision marked as P6(b), that the Committee had arrived at its decision in terms

of the Stockbroker Rules of the Colombo Stock Exchange, which are marked as X2 and

annexed to the 1st Respondent’s objections, in relation to the complaint made by Mrs. N.R.

Molamure dated 05.04.2017.

The Dispute Resolution Committee of the Colombo Stock Exchange, upon perusing the

submissions made by the Appellant, found that it could not identify any legal error in the

decision of the Committee marked as P16. Therefore, the Dispute Resolution Committee

decided to affirm the said decision.

In view of the reasons adumbrated by me, the dismissal of the appeal is also justified.

Preliminary issue of Jurisdiction of this court

The 1st to 8th Respondents as well as the 9th Respondent have raised an objection as to the

maintainability of this Application; the basis of the said objection is that the relationship that

25

exists between the Petitioner and the 1st Respondent is only contractual in nature, and therefore

there is no room to invoke the jurisdiction of this Court by way of public law remedies as far

as this relationship is concerned.

However, the 1st Respondent has definitely and expressly adverted to the fact that it derives its

rights and powers directly from Section 13(a) and Section 24 of the SEC Act. Therefore, even

the Rules promulgated thereunder marked as X2, derive their powers from Section 24 of the

SEC Act.

To further buttress my view, I reproduce Section 24 of SEC Act No. 36 of 1987;

“24.(1) The rules of a licensed stock exchange, in so far as they have been approved by

the Council, shall not be amended, varied or rescinded without the prior approval of

the Council.

(2) Where the Board of Directors of a licensed stock exchange wish to amend its rules

it shall forward by written notice to the Commission the amendments, whether by

rescission, alteration or addition, to such rules which such licensed stock exchange

wish to make.

(3) The Commission shall, after hearing the licensed stock exchange, and within twenty-

one days of receipt of a notice under subsection (2) give written notice to the stock

exchange stating whether such amendments to the rules are allowed or disallowed.

(4) Upon receipt of notice under subsection (3). the stock exchange, shall give

immediate effect to such notice.

(5) Notwithstanding the provisions contained in subsections (3) and (4) of this section,

amendments to rules of a stock exchange of such categories as may be specified by the

Commission by rules made in that behalf. shall take effect immediately upon the

26

forwarding of the written notice referred to in subsection (2) subject to the condition

that the Commission may within twenty one days of such amendment taking effect

disallow such amendment without prejudice to anything previously done thereunder

and require the stock exchange to comply with the provisions of subsection (4) of this

section.”

The other matter is that the 1st Respondent has provided a platform for the players to perform

their respective roles in the share market, and such platform is provided under the powers of

the SEC Act. Therefore, it is my view that there is a public law element involved. As such, the

objection of the Respondents based on the said ground is overruled for the purpose of assuming

jurisdiction to decide the issues that I have raised above.

In addition to the above, even if the parties intended to refer the matter to arbitration, they

should have done so. However, the said objection was also seriously raised before me by the

9th Respondent.

Therefore, I hold that I assume jurisdiction deriving from the statutory powers which the 1st

Respondent claims to have exercised, deriving from the SEC Act.

Therefore, as Justice Marsoof held in the case of Saheer and Others v. Board of Governors,

Zahira College and Others,1 when there is a public element and a public duty is performed

even by a private entity, such as the Board of Governors of Zahira College, Maradana, the

public nature of such performance cannot be denied.

In the same way, the public nature of the 1st Respondent and the privileges and powers

exercised by it in the nature of the public law domain cannot be denied.

1 [2002] 3 Sri L.R. 405.

27

Therefore, it is my view that this Court has justification to hear and decide this application for

the reason that the 1st Respondent, the 6th to 8th Respondents, and the 2nd to 5th Respondents

have taken decisions affecting the rights of the Petitioner, which rights also derive from the

SEC Act and ancillary matters connected thereto and deriving therefrom.

Conclusion

For the reasons adumbrated above, it is my view that the Petitioner has not made out a case.

Accordingly, I dismiss this Application, subject to costs payable by the Petitioner to the 9th

Respondent (the substituted 9th Respondent) and the 1st Respondent, in the sum of Rs. 157,500/-

(One Hundred and Fifty-Seven Thousand Five Hundred Rupees) each.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL