IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

CA (Writ) Application No: 233/2018

In the matter of an Application for

mandates in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari and Mandamus in terms of

Article 140 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Vincy Engineering Pvt. Ltd .,

th No. 23, 5 Lane,

Ratmalana.

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. Kapila Waidyarathne

Former Secretary, Ministry of Defence.

1a. Hemasiri Fernando,

Secretary, Ministry of Defence,

Both of 15/5, Baladaksha Mawatha,

Colombo 3.

2. Vice Admiral s.s. Ranasinghe,

Former Commander of Sri Lanka Navy.

2a. Vice Admiral Piyal de Silva,

The Commander of Sri Lanka Navy.

1

Website Copy Website Copy

3. Rear Admiral W.M.N.D. Bandara,

Director Naval (Logistics).

4. Chairman,

Procurement Committee.

5. Commander (S) J.M.D.J.N.

Jayamanne,

Staff Officer (Local Procurement).

6. Commander (E) W.K.E. Waduge,

Deputy Director,

Marine Engineering.

7. Commander (S) G.D.S.A.P. Perera,

Staff Officer (Local Procurement).

8. Lieutenant Commander (S)

S. K. B. Lindagedara,

Staff Officer (Local Procurement).

9. P.M.N.D. Fernando,

Rear Admiral,

Director General, Logistics.

All of Sri Lanka Navy,

Naval Headquarters,

P.O.Box 593, Colombo l.

10. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

2

Website Copy Website Copy

Before:

Counsel:

Yasantha Kodagoda, P.c., J/ President of the Court of Appeal

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

Shirai Lakthilaka for the Petitioner

Ms. Anusha Fernando, Deputy Solicitor General for

the Respondents

Supported on: 1st July 2019

Written Submissions: Tendered on behalf of the Petitioner on 26th

November 2018

Decided on:

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

Tendered on behalf of the Respondents on 6th

December 2018

2nd December 2019

Bya letter dated 13th September 2016, annexed to the petition marked 'P4',

the Sri Lanka Navy had invited the Petitioner to submit a bid for the supply of

three 81kVA marine generators. Detailed specifications of the generators that

were to be supplied had been annexed to 'P4'. The Petitioner states that it

responded to 'P4' by its bid dated 2ih September 2016, annexed to the

petition marked 'PSa'. After a series of correspondence between the Petitioner

and the Sri Lanka Navy, the Petitioner was informed by letter dated 23rd June

2017, annexed to the petition marked 'P14' as follows:

"We are pleased to inform you that your quotation for supply of 81kVA

Marine Generators has been accepted by the Sri Lanka Navy Department

3

Website Copy Website Copy

Procurement Committee... Hence, arrange to submit a Performance

Security ... on or before 5th July 2017 in order to finalise the purchase ... "

In addition to 'PI4', Sri Lanka Navy had issued the Petitioner a purchase order,

annexed to the petition marked 'PIS' in respect of the said generators, on the

same date as 'PI4'.

The Petitioner states that although it complied with the requirement in 'PI4'

by the submission of the Performance Security, Sri Lanka Navy did not proceed

to enter into an agreement with the Petitioner. Instead, the Petitioner states

that by letter dated 19th March 2018 annexed to the petition marked 'P3', it

was informed by the 3rd Respondent that the Purchase Order 'PIS' had been

cancelled as "your after sales service capacities are not sufficient to continue

the procurement process".

Dissatisfied by the said decision, the Petitioner has invoked the jurisdiction of

this Court seeking inter alia the following relief:

(a) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the decision of the 3rd Respondent

contained in 'P3' to cancel the purchase order issued to the Petitioner

for the supply of three 81kVA generators;

(b) A Writ of Mandamus directing the Respondents to continue with the

tender process relating to the procurement of the said generators.

This Court would now proceed to consider the primary complaint of the

Petitioner that the decision to cancel the Purchase Order is unreasonable and

4

Website Copy Website Copy

arbit rary, in the light of t he material that has been placed before this Court by

the parties.

Having examined t he documents submitted by the parties, this Court observes

that in its bid of 2th September 2016 marked 'PSa', the Petitioner had made

the following representations with regard to after sales service:

"We confirm that we have a well equipped workshop with a team of

skilled Engineering Staff specially trained far generator installations,

repairs and maintenance.

We provide prompt after sales service 24 hours a day and 365 days a year

for our customers.

If the generator is needed to be brought to our workshop for any

repair/service during the warranty period, we will provide a stand-by

generator until the repair/service is completed."

Bya second letter of the same dat e annexed to the petition marked 'PS', the

Petitioner had informed the Chairman of the Procurement Committee as

follows:

"We are the authorized distributor for 'Mega Power', 'Denyo', 'Lister

Petter', 'Danyo' and 'Haomax' generators in Sri Lanka and equipped with

fully company trained engineers and technicians for repairs and

maintenance work.

5

Website Copy Website Copy

We take this opportunity to inform you that we are one of leading players

in the field of supplying and installation of generators in Sri Lanka and

gained wide experience in supplying, installing, commissioning and

maintenance of generators to government and private organisations

island wide.

We also have a well equipped workshop manned by fully qualified

technical team attending to after sales service within 24 hours in the

Colombo city limits and 48 hours in outstations."

By a third letter dated 27th September 2016,1 which has not been produced

with t he petition, the Petitioner has informed the Chairman, Procurement

Committee as follows:

"Certification of the Workshop facilities and having of tools and

accessories for after sales service

We hereby certify that we have fully equipped workshop facilities

dedicated tools to carry out the after sales services, maintenance and

repairs for the Generators and other machineries marketed by us and also

having a team of skilled Engineering Staff specially trained for carry out

the after sales services, maintenance and repairs.

Our workshop addresses are as follows:

Workshop No.1 - No.7, 3th Lane, Colombo 6.

1 This document has been annexed to the set of documents marked '2' filed by the Respondents.

6

Website Copy Website Copy

Workshop No.2 - No. 11, Pennyquick Road, Colombo 6. "

It is the view of this Court that by the above letters, the Petitioner had

represented in no uncertain terms that it has fully equipped workshops and

qualified, skilled and experienced staff to carry out the maintenance and

repa irs of the generators that were to be supplied.

This Court, having observed that the petition does not contain any material

with regard to what t ra nspired between the Petitioner and the Respondents

after the Purchase Order 'P1S' was issued and prior to the cancellation thereof

by 'P3', afforded the Respondents an opportunity of filing documents to

explain what prompted the Sri Lanka Navy to come to the conclusion that the

Petitioner does not possess the capability to provide after sales services, which

is the basis for 'P3'.

By a letter dated 25th August 2017/ the Respondents had informed the

Petitioner that it has received information that the Petitioner has supplied

false information with regard inter alia to its after sales service capabilities,

and called upon the Petitioner to confirm whether it has workshop facilities

and other resources to carry out repairs and maintenance, to which the

Petitioner had responded posit ively.3 Sri Lanka Navy had thereafter appointed

a Board of Study to 'ascertain the capacities/facilities' possessed by the

Petitioner.4 Pursuant to a joint physical inspection carried out with the

2 This letter has been produced by the Respondents marked '10', ' This letter has been produced by the Respondents marked '11', ,

The report of the Board of Study has been produced by the Respondents marked '13'.

7

Website Copy Website Copy

Petitioner of its workshop facilit ies, the Board of Study had made the following

observations:

"The Committee Members visited the workshop No. 1 at Colombo 06.

However, it was observed that the said location is only a storing yard of

generators which is named under Mis Mangala Electronic and

Supermarket. Neither was there any generator repair facility nor spares

available in this location.

The Committee Members inquired about the workshop No.2 at Colombo

06 and representatives of MIS Vincy Engineering Private Limited informed

the said workshop was closed and same had been shifted to Piliyandala

recently.

The Committee Members visited the workshop which is located at

Piliyandala and observed it is not a proper workshop. The said workshop is

located in a part of a house and there is neither sUfficient work space nor

sufficient repair facility even for medium range generators. Further, it was

observed that there was no standard tools and test equipment available in

the workshop. The Board inspected the shown store which is kept with

limited number of consumable type spares related to machinery and

generators.

While visiting the workshop at Piliyandala, only one technician was there.

Due to some ambiguities, the Board inquired about the ownership of the

said workshop and he confirmed that the said workshop is registered

under the name of MIS 1.S. Lanka Services and Suppliers Private Limited

8

Website Copy Website Copy

which undertakes machinery repairs including generator repairs as a

machinery repair firm of Sri Lanka.

It is observed that the workshop which was located at PiJiyandala did not

consist of sufficient technical staff and there was no engineer available."

The above findings have been communicated to the Petitioner by letter dated

13th October 2017s It was the submission of the learned Deputy Solicitor

General that the decision to cancel the award was taken pursuant to the Sri

Lanka Navy having satisfied itself that:

(a) The Petitioner does not have the necessary facilities to carry out after

sales and maintenance services;

(b) The Petitioner has misrepresented facts in its bid with regard to its ability

to provide after sales and maintenance services.

Two issues arise from the above submission of the learned Deputy Solicitor

General.

The first is whether the decision to cancel the purchase order issued in favour

of the Petitioner can be considered 'unreasonable', in the light of the material

that has now been placed before this Court by the Respondents. This Court

observes that public funds are being used by the Sri Lanka Navy for the

purchase of the said generators. It is therefore the responsibility of the Sri

Lanka Navy to ensure that what the Government eventually purchases meets

5 This letter has been produced by the Respondents marked '17'.

9

Website Copy Website Copy

its technical specificat ions and requirements, is the most economical in terms

of price, and is capable of being used for a long period of time. In other words,

the procurement of the goods by the Respondents should be on the 'financially

the most advantageous and qualitatively the best services and supplies for the

country.6 This Court must emphasise that adhering to this norm is of

paramount importance because procurement is carried out by a State agency,

using public funds. Thus, the procurement decision must serve the best

interests of Sri Lanka.

What is meant by the said phrase was explained succinctly by A.R.B.

Amerasinghe J, in Smithkline Beecham Biologicals S.A and another Vs. State

Pharmaceutical Corporation of Sri Lanka and others

7, in the following manner:

"Instead of stating that the objective of the (Procurement) Guidelines was

to procure the cheapest services, the President and Minister of Finance, in

the Preface to the Guidelines said that the prescribed procedure was "To

obtain financially the most advantageous and qualitatively the best

services and supplies for the country. " What the "Tender procedure should

ensure" is, inter alia, stated in the Guidelines to be "optimum Economic

Advantage to the nation": I understand this to mean that the procedure

relating to Government procurements should ensure the most favourable

conditions for the advancement of the People by obtaining '1inancially the

most advantageous and qualitatively the best supplies for the country".

What is '1inancially the most advantageous and qualitatively the best

, Per Amerasinghe, J in Smithkline Beecham Biologicals S.A and another Vs. State Pharmaceutical Corporation

of Sri Lanka and others (1997) 3 Sri LR 20 at 38). 'Ibid.

10

Website Copy Website Copy

supplies for the country" is pre-eminently a matter of policy that the

Government, which is accountable to the People, must decide .... "

In its bid document, the Petitioner has clearly represented to the Sri Lanka

Navy that it has its own workshops and that it has the capacity to carry out the

maintenance of the said generators as well as the repair of the said generators.

The decision to award the tender to the Petitioner appears to have been

influenced by the aforementioned representations made by the Petitioner by

'PS', 'PS(a), and the third letter of even date.s However, the joint inspection

that was carried out with the participation of the Petitioner after the

procurement decision was taken, had revealed that the Petitioner does not

possess such capabilities. The Petitioner has not filed any material before this

Court to demonstrate that it submitted a response to the said observations nor

has the Petitioner filed any material to contradict the said findings. In such

circumstances, it is the view of this Court that where material facts have been

misrepresented in the offer, the Respondents were left with no option but to

cancel the Purchase Order 'P1S'. Thus, this Court must arrive at the finding

that the Petitioner is guilty of dishonest misrepresentation of material facts to

both the Sri Lanka Navy, and subsequently to this Court. To have proceeded

with the procurement in spite of knowing that the Petitioner has

misrepresented facts and would not be able to carry out repairs and provide

maintenance services effectively, may have resulted in a loss to the State and

wastage of public funds. In this background, this Court is of the view that the

decision of the Respondents to cancel the Purchase Order is 'reasonable', and

has been taken in the best interests of the Sri Lanka Navy.

Supra.

11

Website Copy Website Copy

The second issue that arises from the submission of the learned Deputy

Solicitor General is the fact that the Petitioner has suppressed from this Court

what transpired between the issuance of 'PlS' and 'P3'. As observed earlier,

the joint inspection was carried out with the participation of the Petitioner and

its findings were made available to it. This Court is of the view that the

Petitioner ought to have, and could have disclosed details thereof in its

petition as it has a direct bearing on the cancellation of the Purchase Order

and was therefore a materia l fact. The Petitioner, for reasons that are

inferentially obvious, has chosen to suppress such facts from this Court. In

these circumstances, this Court is of the view that the Petitioner is guilty of

suppression of material facts, and that, in the said circumstances, this

application is liable to be dismissed, in limine, with consequences flowing to

the Petitioner

Our Courts have consistently held that a party invoking the Writ jurisdiction of

this Court must come with clean hands and in utmost good faith. The rationale

for this principle has been laid down by the Supreme Court in liyanage &

another v Ratnasiri. Divisional Secretary. Gampaha & Others9 citing the case

of Jayasinghe v The National Institute of Fisheries and Nautical Engineering

(NIFNE) and Others10 which had held as follows:

"The conduct of the petitioner in withholding these material facts from

Court shows a lack of uberrimae fides on the part of the petitioner. When

a litigant makes an application to this Court seeking relief, he enters into a

contractual obligation with the Court. This contractual relationship

, 2013 (1) Sri LR 6 at page 15.

10 2002 (1) Sri LR 277.

12

Website Copy Website Copy

'.

requires the petitioner to disclose all material facts correctly and frankly.

This is a duty cast on any litigant seeking relief from Court."

In M.P.A.U.S Fernando. the Conservator General of Forests and two others

vs. Timberlake Int ernational Pvt. ltd. and anotherll, the Supreme Court,

having held that t he conduct of an applicant seeking Writs of Certiorari and

Mandamus is of great releva nce because such Writs, being prerogative

remedies, are not issued as of right, and are dependent on the discretion of

Cou rt, stated as follows:

"It is trite law that any person invoking the discretionary jurisdiction of the

Court of Appeal for obtaining prerogative relief, has a duty to show

uberrimae fides or ultimate (utmost) good faith, and disclose all material

facts to this Court to enable it to arrive at a correct adjudication on the

issues ariSing upon this application."

This Court has also repeatedly expressed the view that parties seeking relief

from this Court should present all relevant facts to this Court without

suppressing material facts.

The final matter that this Court needs to decide is whether costs should be

ordered, taking into consideration all of the circumstances of this case and the

conduct of the Petit ioner. In this regard, this Court would be guided by the

following observation of the Supreme Court in leon Peiris Kumarasinghe vs.

Samantha Weliveriya:12

11 S.c. Appeal No. 06/2008; sc Minutes of 2' March 2010.

12 S.c. Spl. L.A. No. 37/2012 - SC Minutes of 12th November 2013 .

13

Website Copy Website Copy

. ~ -

"This Court cannot over emphasize the need to appropriately deal with

litigants who attempt to abuse the process of Court and thereby cause

unnecessary delay and costs to other parties, in order to ensure that in the

future, litigants will not be tempted to indulge in such iII- conceived

practices."

In t he above circumstances, this Court does not see any legal basis to issue

forma l Notice of this application on the Respondents. This application is

accordingly dismissed. Th is Court orders that the Petitioner pay a sum of Rs.

25,000 as costs to the Commander of the Sri Lanka Navy.

This Court directs the Registrar of this Court to forward a copy of this Order to

the Secretary, Ministry of Defence and the Commander of the Sri Lanka Navy

to enable Sri Lanka Navy to review its decision to have the Petitioner on its

'Register of Local Suppliers'.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Yasantha Kodagoda, P .C., J/ President of the Court of Appeal

I agree.

President of the Court of Appeal

14

Website Copy Website Copy