==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0216/2020

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal No:

CA/HCC/0216/2020 Ranhawadi Gedara Sriyani Mangalika

Rajapaksha alias Nona Akka

High Court of Colombo

Case No: HC/8315/2016

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Samantha Premachandra for the

Appellant.

Yuhan Abeywickrama, DSG for the

Respondent.

CA/HCC/0216/2020

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 09/09/2025 and 01/10/2025

DECIDED ON : 25/11/2025

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted by the Attorney General in the High Court of

Colombo under Sections 54(A) (b) and 54(A) (d) of the Poisons, Opium and

Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended by Act No. 13 of 1984 for trafficking

and possession of 5.80 grams of Heroin (Diacetylmorphine) on 24th March

2014.

After the trial, the Appellant was found guilty on the 1st count and the

learned High Court Judge of Colombo had sentenced her to life

imprisonment on 25/09/2020. She was acquitted from the 2nd count.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent to argue this matter in her absence. During the argument

she has been connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

CA/HCC/0216/2020

3 | P a g e

On behalf of the Appellant the following Grounds of Appeal are raised.

1. The prosecution version lacks credibility and probability.

2. Inter se and per se contradictions of PW1 and PW2 had not been taken

into consideration.

3. Version of the prosecution regarding the informant lacks credibility.

4. The dock statement of the Appellant was analysed on a wrong premise.

Background of the case.

In this case the raid was conducted upon the receipt of specific information

by PW1. The raid was conducted by a team of police officers from the Police

Organized Crimes and Vice Control Division headed by PW1. All members of

the team had been named as witnesses in the indictment including the

Government Analyst. The prosecution had called PW1, PW2, PW10, PW12,

PW8 and the Government Analyst (PW14) and closed the case. The

prosecution had marked productions P1 to P12 during the trial.

When the defence was called, the Appellant had made a dock statement and

closed the case.

On 24/03/2014, PW1, IP/Janak attached to the Police Organized Crimes

and Vice Control Division, while on crime prevention duty, had met an

informant at Grandpass. The informant had told him that a lady called ‘Nona

Akka’ with her husband, namely Siril Aiya, used to traffic Heroin in the night

and that they could be apprehended near the stairs of the Prince of Wales

Road, Grandpass. The informant had given the features of both the Appellant

and the person called Siril Aiya. As per the information, the police had gone

near the stairs at about 19.15pm and waited for the arrival of the Appellant

and her husband.

When the Appellant and Siril alighted from a three-wheeler at the location,

PW1 identified himself and upon repeated request to hand over the

CA/HCC/0216/2020

4 | P a g e

substance, the Appellant had handed over a parcel taken from the left side

pocket of her dress. As the substance in the parcel tested positive for Heroin,

she was arrested and Siril was also detained by the police. Further,

Rs.101,030/- in cash was also recovered from the Appellant.

Although the place of arrest is just 300 meters away from the Grandpass

Police Station, the Appellant and Siril were brought to the Police Narcotics

Bureau thereafter. The substance was weighed in the presence of the

Appellant at the Police Narcotics Bureau. The parcel had contained about 14

grams of substance. Thereafter, the Appellant and Siril were brought to the

Grandpass Police Station. After entering notes, PW1 had handed over the

productions and the Appellant to the reserve police officer PW8, PC 6852

Sunil. The Heroin parcel was entered under production No.182/14.

PW2, SI/Somarathna had given evidence to corroborate the evidence of PW1.

In every criminal case, the burden is on the prosecution to prove the case

beyond reasonable doubt against the accused person and this burden never

shifts. Hence, an accused person has no burden to prove his innocence

unless he pleads a general or a special exception in the Penal Code.

In Miller v. Minister of Pensions (1947) 2 All E.R. 372 the court held that:

“…the evidence must reach the same degree of cogency as is required

in a criminal case before an accused person is found guilty. That degree

is well settled. It need not reach certainty, but it must carry high degree

of probability. Proof beyond reasonable doubt does not mean proof

beyond the shadow of a doubt. The law would fail to protect the

community if it admitted fanciful possibilities to deflect the course of

justice. If the evidence is so strong against a man as to leave only a

remote possibility in his favour which can be dismissed with the

sentence, “of course it is possible, but not in the least probable,” the case

CA/HCC/0216/2020

5 | P a g e

is proved beyond reasonable doubt, but nothing short of that will

suffice”.

As the first, second and third grounds of the appeal are interconnected, the

said grounds will be considered together in this appeal. In the first ground

of appeal, the Appellant contends that the prosecution version lacks

credibility and probability. And in the second ground, the Appellant

contended that the inter se and per se contradictions of PW1 and PW2 had

not been taken into consideration. In the third ground, the Appellant

contends that the version of the prosecution regarding the informant lacks

credibility.

PW1 had met the informant casually and received the information that the

Appellant and a person called Siril, said to be the husband of the Appellant,

were trafficking Heroin. Although the information revealed about the

existence of a female suspect, PW1 had not taken any endeavour to get down

a female police officer from the Grandpass Police Station, which is situated

about 300 meters away from the place of the incident.

As the Appellant and Siril had alighted from a three-wheeler, neither a

statement from the driver nor the number of the same was noted down by

any of the witnesses.

Although the informant had mentioned the name of Siril as the person

coming with the Appellant with the drugs, he was simply discharged even

without a statement being recorded.

According to PW1, the Appellant and Siril were arrested at 8.00pm on

24.03.2014. By passing the Grandpass Police Station, the Appellant and Siril

were taken to the Police Narcotics Bureau and returned to the Grandpass

Police Station and handed over to the Grandpass Police at 1.15am on the

following day. This was 5 hours and 15 minutes after the arrest.

CA/HCC/0216/2020

6 | P a g e

Although PW1 admitted that they recovered Rs.101,030/- from the

possession of the Appellant at the time of her arrest, this was neither entered

in his notes nor produced as a production during the trial.

Although prosecution witnesses PW1 and PW2 said that Siril was taken

along with the Appellant to the Police Narcotics Bureau on the request of the

Appellant, this was not entered in their notes by the witnesses.

The above highlighted inconsistencies in the evidence of PW1 and PW2

cannot be considered trivial ones. These are strong challenges to the

prosecution version. They certainly attack the root of the matter very

strongly.

In the book Sarkar on Evidence, 15th Edition at page 112, it is stated as

follows:

“Minor discrepancies are possible even in the version of truthful

witnesses and such minor discrepancies only add to the truthfulness of

their evidence. [Sidhan v. State of Kerela [1986] Cri LJ 470, 473

(Kerala)]. But discrepancies in the statements of witnesses on material

points should not be lightly passed over, as they seriously affect the

value of their testimony (Brij Lal v. Kunwar, 36A 187: 18 CWN 649:

A 1914 PC 38). The main thing to be seen in whether the inconsistencies

go to the root of the matter or pertain to insignificant aspects thereof. In

the former case, the defence may be justified in seeking advantage of the

incongruities obtaining in the evidence. In the latter, however no such

benefit may be available to it. (Krishna Pillai Sree Kumar v. State of

Kerala A [1981] SC 1237,1239).”

In The Attorney General v. Sandanam Pitchai Mary Theresa [2011] 2 SLR

292 the court held that:

“Whilst internal contradictions or discrepancies would ordinarily affect

the trustworthiness of the witness statement, it is well established that

CA/HCC/0216/2020

7 | P a g e

the Court must exercise its judgment on the nature of the inconsistency

or contradiction and whether they are material to the facts in issue”.

In all detection cases the police detectives maintain records. When they are

called upon by the prosecution to testify in court, they are allowed to use

their notes to refresh their memory. Hence, their evidence cannot consist of

inter se or per se contradictions as they give systematic evidence regarding

that particular incident. If their evidence consists of inter se or per se

contradictions, which affects the root of the case, their credibility becomes

questionable.

According to PW1, he had received specific information that a lady called

‘Nona Akka’ and Siril were involved in trafficking drugs at the Prince of Wales

Avenue. Although specific information had been received about the

involvement of a female called ‘Nona Akka’, PW1 had failed to include a

female police officer to the team. The raiding officers had not made any

endeavour to call upon a lady police officer from the Grandpass Police

Station, which is 300 meters away from the place of detection. Hence, the

Counsel argues that the incident described by PW1 and PW2 fail the test of

probability.

As stated above, the raiding team had taken the Appellant and the person

called Siril to the Police Narcotics Bureau to weigh the production, instead

of the nearest police station which is only 300 meters away from the place of

arrest. Lots of valuable time could have been saved, had the Appellant and

Siril been taken to the Grandpass Police Station. In this case the time

duration between the time the Appellant was arrested, and the time the

production was handed over to PW8 is 5 hours and 15 minutes. Further,

Siril was released without a statement being recorded from him. This is quite

unusual.

CA/HCC/0216/2020

8 | P a g e

The Probability test is a prerequisite in criminal trials to prove the case

beyond reasonable doubt. In this case the conduct of PW1 is highly

questionable, which certainly does not pass the probability test.

Taking into consideration all these circumstances, I am of the view that the

conviction of the Appellant cannot be allowed to stand as the prosecution

had failed its duty to prove this case beyond a reasonable doubt. I set aside

the conviction and sentence imposed by the Learned High Court Judge of

Colombo dated 25/09/2020 on the Appellant. Therefore, she is acquitted

from this case.

Accordingly, the appeal is allowed.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Colombo along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL