==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0267-268/24

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: Democratic Socialist Republic of

CA/HCC/0267-268/2024 Sri Lanka

High Court of Ratnapura

Case No: HC/147/2006 COMPLAINANT

Vs.

1. Suse Anthony Reji

2. Wadiwel Bettan Nimal

3. Subranaiyam Arumugan Raja alias

Thattaya

4. Perumal Murugesu

5. Subramaniyam Selvaraja

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

CA/HCC/0267-268/24

2 | P a g e

1. Suse Anthony Reji

2. Perumal Murugesu

ACCUSED-APPELLANTS

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Asthika Devendra with Aruna Madushanka

for the 1st Appellant.

Gayal Kalatuwawa for the 2nd Appellant.

Dishna Warnakula, DSG for the

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 09/03/2026

DECIDED ON : 19/06/2026

******************************

CA/HCC/0267-268/24

3 | P a g e

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellants (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellants) along with three other accused persons were indicted jointly in

the High Court of Ratnapura as follows:

1. That on or about the 25.07.2002 the accused named in the

indictment were members of an unlawful assembly with the common

objective of causing hurt to Soosai Norman thereby committing an

offence punishable under Section 140 of the Penal Code.

2. At the same time, same place and in the course of the same

transaction the accused had committed the murder of Soosai Norman

thereby committing an offence punishable under Section 296 read

with Section 146 of the Penal Code.

3. At the same time, same place and in the course of the same

transaction the accused had committed an attempted murder on

Sappan Chandrakumar thereby committing an offence punishable

under Section 300 read with Section 146 of the Penal Code.

4. Under Section 296 read with Section 32 of the Penal Code. (Alternative

common intention charge to count 02).

5. Under Section 300 read with Section 32 of the Penal Code. (Alternative

common intention charge to count 03).

CA/HCC/0267-268/24

4 | P a g e

The trial commenced before the High Court Judge of Ratnapura as the

Appellants had opted for a non-jury trial. After the conclusion of the

prosecution’s case, the Learned High Court Judge had called for the defence

and the Appellants had made dock statements and closed their case.

After considering the evidence presented by both parties, the Learned High

Court Judge who heard the case at the High Court of Ratnapura delivered

the Judgement and had convicted the Appellants who were the 1st and 4th

Accused named in the indictment for the fourth and fifth charges and

sentenced them as follows:

● Under the 4th Count - death sentence on the Appellants.

● Under the Fifth Count - 15-year rigorous imprisonment with a

fine of Rs.10,000/- on the Appellants. The fine is subject to 03

months simple imprisonment.

The Appellants were acquitted from 1st ,2nd and 3rd counts and, the 2nd, 3rd

and 5th Accused were acquitted from all the charges.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellants

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellants informed this court that the

Appellants have given consent to argue this matter in their absence. Also, at

the time of argument the Appellants were connected via the Zoom platform

from prison.

CA/HCC/0267-268/24

5 | P a g e

Background of the Case.

The prosecution’s case rests on the testimony of an eye witness and

circumstantial evidence.

PW1, Sappan Chandra Kumar is the eye witness and injured in this case.

Before he could give evidence before the High Court, he had passed away

and his evidence was admitted to the proceedings under Section 33 of the

Evidence Ordinance as he had testified before at the non-summary inquiry

in the Magistrate Court of Ratnapura and his evidence was subjected to cross

examination. His evidence was marked as P4 by the prosecution.

The incident had happened around 10.30.pm on 25.07.2002. The eye

witness and the deceased are friends and had been engaged in watcher duty

at a nearby mine. On the day of the incident, the deceased had called PW1

to go for watcher duty at the mine. Before they went to the mine, both had

dinner at the deceased’s sisters house and came out of the house, sat on a

step of a nearby church and smoked a cigarette. The Appellants who were

armed with swords had arrived at the scene and inquired from them why

they do dirty works. When the both of them asked what the dirty works they

had done to them were, the 1st Appellant had cut the deceased on his face

and the deceased had fallen down. The 2nd Appellant had cut the witness

which landed on his back. When PW1 ran for his life, he had seen the other

Accused there with arms. They had chased him and when PW1 had fallen

down, the 2nd Appellant had cut him again with the sword. But PW1 had

somehow managed to escape from them.

According to PW13, CI/Palitha had given evidence upon the notes entered

by IP/Basil Dias who was deceased at the time of the trial. According to

PW13, when they went to the scene of crime, they had seen the deceased

lying fallen with blood all over the body. The deceased’s face was mutilated.

Investigations revealed the names of the Appellants and the other Accused

named in the indictment. The houses of the Appellants and the Accused had

been attacked by unknown persons.

CA/HCC/0267-268/24

6 | P a g e

PW06, JMO Dissanayake who held the post mortem of the deceased, had

noted 08 cut injuries on the deceased’s body. According to him the cause of

death is due to hemorrhagic shock due to multiple cut injuries to the head.

The JMO had also examined PW1 and had mentioned in the Medico Legal

Report that injury number 4 is grievous and endangering the life.

The 1st Appellant has filed the following grounds of appeal:

1. The learned High Court Judge has erred in law in considering the

evidence of PW1 of the non-summary under Section 33 of the Evidence

Ordinance.

2. The prosecution had failed to prove the case (murder and attempted

murder) beyond reasonable doubt in as much as:

I. The Learned High Court failed to consider whether the version

of the prosecution fails the test of probability,

II. Failed to consider the previous conduct of the Appellant (even if

the prosecution is believed) would not point premeditated

murder,

III. Failed to consider the conduct of the parties specially the words

uttered. (even if the prosecution is believed).

3. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to appreciate that the

prosecution has failed to establish common intention as required for

the conviction.

4. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to consider a conviction of

murder cannot be sustained on evidence before court in as much as

evidence before court shows that there were mitigating circumstances.

5. Has the Learned High Court Judge shifted the burden to the Accused?

6. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to correctly evaluate the dock

statement of the Appellant in as much as:

I. Has failed to consider in the correct light which gives light to a

sudden fight between two fragments.

CA/HCC/0267-268/24

7 | P a g e

II. The Learned High Court Judge has given very low value to the

same which is bad in law.

The 2nd Appellant has filed the following grounds of appeal:

1. Whether the Learned High Court Judge has erred in law in admitting

the evidence of PW1 at the non-summary inquiry under Section 33 of

the Evidence Ordinance.

2. The Learned High Court Judge has erred in holding that the evidence

of PW1 is trustworthy to be relied upon.

3. The Learned High Court Judge has erred in holding that the

prosecution has proved the common murderous intention on the part

of the 2nd Appellant beyond a reasonable doubt.

4. The Learned High Court Judge has erred in rejecting the dock

statement of the 2nd Appellant.

Considering the grounds of appeal raised by the Appellants, it will be

considered on the following common grounds;

1. The Learned High Court Judge has wrongly admitted the deposition

of PW1 under Section 33 of the Evidence Ordinance as trustworthy

evidence.

2. Whether the prosecution proved the case beyond reasonable

grounds.

3. Whether the prosecution failed to establish common murderous

intention.

4. Whether the Learned High Court Judge failed to appreciate that

there were mitigating circumstances.

5. Whether the Learned High Court Judge had reversed the burden to

the Appellants.

6. Whether the Learned High Court Judge has correctly evaluated the

dock statements of the Appellants.

CA/HCC/0267-268/24

8 | P a g e

7. Appropriateness of the sentence imposed on count number five,

attempted murder.

In the first ground of appeal, both the Learned Counsels strenuously argued

that relying on the evidence of PW1, whose evidence was admitted under

Section 33 of the Evidence Ordinance, has caused great prejudice to the

Appellants as they mainly argued that the Learned Trial Judge had failed to

consider all the circumstances relating to whether PW1 had witnessed the

incident as claimed by him in his testimony.

In CA/HCC/417/2018 decided on 14/03/2024 this court has held that:

Eyewitness testimony is one of the most important kinds of criminal

evidence. In criminal cases, the judges regularly face the difficult but

crucial task of evaluating eyewitness testimony. This sometimes means

checking whether the witness’s story fits with other established facts of

the case. However, the veracity of such a story cannot always be

verified or falsified directly. In such cases judges will have to look at

whether the statement comes from a reliable source.

Further, an eyewitness’s testimony is probably the most persuasive

form of evidence presented in court, but in many cases, its accuracy is

dubious. There is also evidence that mistaken eyewitness evidence can

lead to wrongful conviction—sending people to prison for years or

decades, even to death row, for crimes they did not commit.

In considering the evidence of an eye witness, the Court should look at

the demeanour of the witness, the inherent probability of the account,

any internal inconsistencies in the account, whether the account is

consistent with previous statements by the witness, whether the

witness has any bias against the accused or any family or group to

which the accused belongs, whether the evidence at the crime scene

CA/HCC/0267-268/24

9 | P a g e

supports the account, and whether the witness’s testimony is supported

by the testimony of other witnesses. These factors are very important

as the burden of proof is on the prosecution in all criminal cases.

As stated above, PW1, who is an eye witness had vividly explained how this

gruesome incident had happened, in his evidence given in the non-summary.

He had clearly seen the attack on the deceased before he could escape from

the crime scene with injuries. However, he had passed away before he could

give evidence before the High Court.

Section 33 of the Evidence Ordinance states:

Evidence given by a witness in a judicial proceeding, or before any

person authorized by law to take it, is relevant, for the purpose of

proving, in a subsequent judicial proceeding, or in a later stage of the

same judicial proceeding, the truth of the facts which it states, when

the witness is dead or cannot be found, or is incapable of giving

evidence, or is kept out of the way by the adverse party, or if his

presence cannot be obtained without an amount or delay or expense

which, under the circumstances of the case, the court considers

unreasonable:

Provided-

(a) that the proceeding was between the same parties or their

representatives in interest;

(b) that the adverse party in the first proceeding had the right and

opportunity to cross-examine;

(c) that the questions in issue were substantially the same in the first

as in the second proceeding.

Explanation:

A criminal trial or inquiry shall be deemed to be a proceeding between

the prosecutor and the accused within the meaning of this section.

CA/HCC/0267-268/24

10 | P a g e

Section 33 of the Evidence Ordinance provides for the admissibility of

evidence given in a previous judicial proceeding. It serves as an important

legal exception to the general rule against hearsay, therefore, allowing

previous testimony to be submitted and used as substantive evidence in a

subsequent trial or a subsequent stage of the same proceeding.

As per the Evidence Ordinance, the best evidence principle requires

witnesses to testify in person, which would allow to test their credibility.

However, Section 33 mitigates situations where a witness is unavailable; past

recorded evidence can then be admitted without the witness being recalled.

As such, Section 33 ensures that justice ensues, even when witnesses

become unavailable.

In Leelawathi Menike v Attorney General [2008] 2 SLR 1 the court held

that:

“(4) Court has no discretion as to admitting a deposition when the

witness is dead, cannot be found, is incapable or is kept out of the way,

deposition of such witness is declared to be relevant and must therefore

be admitted.

(5) When the requirements in Section 33 of the Evidence Ordinance are

satisfied Section 33 governs the reception as substantive evidence of the

testimony given in a former judicial proceeding. The reception of

narrated testimony permitted by Section 33, is tantamount to an

exception to the hearsay rule the basis is that the evidence was

originally given on oath and was subject to cross-examination. These

characteristics invest the evidence so introduced with a degree of

reliability comparable to a greater extent with pure viva voce evidence -

the trial judge had not erred in relying on the evidence of witness R

under Section 33”.

CA/HCC/0267-268/24

11 | P a g e

In this connection, it is relevant to note that E. R. S. R. Coomaraswamy,

The Law of Evidence, Vol. I, at pages 492-493 states as follows:

“The court has to exercise the power given in Section 33 with great

caution and must insist on strict proof before holding that the witness

is dead or cannot be found or has become incapable of giving evidence

or has been kept out of the way by the adverse party or his presence

cannot be secured without an unreasonable amount of delay and

expense. But once any of the first four conditions of death, not being

found, incapacity to give evidence or being kept out of the way by the

adverse party has been proved, the court has no discretion and must

admit the deposition, since Section 33 declares such deposition to be

relevant and, therefore, admissible.”

In the case of Francis Samarawickrema v. Dona Enatto Hilda Jayasinghe

[2009] 1 SLR 293 it was noted that:

“The basis of the application was that Mr. Kahatapitiya was dead, and

that therefore evidence given by him in the course of the first trial in

the same action “is relevant, for the purpose of proving, . . . the truth

of the facts which it states...” Section 33 is one of the many exceptions

found in the Evidence Ordinance to the hearsay rule, and has been

considered by this Court in decisions such as Herath v. Jabbar,

Cassim v. Suppiah Pulle, Kobbekaduwa v. Seneviratne and Sheela

Sinharage v. The Attorney- General.”

In the case of Chandrakumar and Another v. Captain Samarawickrama

(2002) 2 SLR 153 it was held:

“The primary object of recording a summary of evidence being to

consider whether there is a prima facie case against the accused, it

cannot be said that recording a summary of evidence is not a judicial

CA/HCC/0267-268/24

12 | P a g e

proceeding. The direction given by the Judge-advocate to the Court

Martial that the evidence given by D, at the stage of recording the

summary of evidence was irrelevant and inadmissible under s. 33

Evidence Ordinance, is patently wrong as such the conviction has to

be quashed.”

Considering the above cited judgment and the writing, accepting evidence

under Section 33, the Court has no discretion but to accept the evidence

which has fulfilled the requirement under Section 33 of the Evidence

Ordinance.

Both the Learned Counsels strenuously argued that in this case, the

evidence appreciated under Section 33 of Evidence Ordinance is not a

properly completed document. (P4). The numbering is incorrect or not in

proper sequence.

As rightly argued by the Deputy Solicitor General appearing for the

Respondent, even if there is a correction of the page number at page 3, where

page numbering is repeated and hence same is corrected to read as page 3,

there is no material to indicate that there is a missing part in between the

two pages which was originally marked as Page 2.

The Learned High Court Judge in her judgment at pages 388-395 had

considered this contention and correctly held that accepting the evidence of

PW1 under Section 33 of Evidence Ordinance has not caused any prejudice

to the Appellants. Hence, this ground has no merit.

In the second and third grounds, the Learned Counsel for the Appellants

contends that the prosecution had failed to prove the existence of common

murderous intention and thereby has failed to prove the case beyond

reasonable doubt.

The Learned Counsel contended that as per the evidence of PW1, the

interaction between the Appellants and the deceased was initiated with a

verbal exchange. It was contended that the Appellants did not immediately

CA/HCC/0267-268/24

13 | P a g e

attack and there was a discussion before the alleged assault, and that the

sequence of events is inconsistent with premeditated murder and if the

Appellants had a murderous intention, the confrontation would likely have

been immediately and without verbal exchange.

PW1 had clearly given evidence on how the incident happened. The deceased

and PW1 had only replied to the questions put forward by the Appellants.

When the deceased and PW1 denied that they did not do any dirty act

towards them, the Appellants armed with swords attacked the deceased and

PW1 immediately. Evidence clearly shows that the Appellants had come with

arms to attack the deceased and PW1. This clearly shows the preparation of

the Appellants to execute their preplanned objective.

In Gunasiri and others v Republic [2009] 1 SLR 39 it was held that:

“To establish the existence of common intention it is not essential to

prove that the criminal act was done pursuant to a pre-arranged plan.

A common intention can come into existence without a prearrangement.

It can be formed on the spur of the movement.”

The Learned High Court Judge in her judgment had very correctly considered

and analyzed the evidence and come to the finding that the Appellants had

committed the murder and the attempted murder after actuating a common

murderous intention. And thereby, prosecution had proved the case beyond

a reasonable doubt. Therefore, these two grounds are also devoid of any

merit.

In the 4th ground of appeal, the Learned Counsel for the Appellants

contended that the Learned High Court Judge failed to appreciate that there

were mitigating circumstances.

Mitigating factors would be specific factors relating to a crime, and such

factors would not excuse the offence but would reduce the culpability of the

defendant, thereby justifying the imposition of a lesser sentence. As such, it

CA/HCC/0267-268/24

14 | P a g e

would provide the relevant information needed to humanize the offender and

assist courts to impose a punishment that is appropriate for the situation.

In the case of Gurudeniya Lekamgedara Nishantha Bandara v. Attorney

General (S.C. Appeal No.62/2008), it was noted that:

“The said offence of murder in terms of Section 294 of the Penal Code is

reduced to culpable homicide not amounting to murder under Section

293 of the Penal Code, if any of the five exceptions to Section 294 could

be shown to apply. The exceptions are as follows: grave and sudden

provocation; exceeding in good faith the right of private defence; bona

fide overstepping of the limits of his authority by a public servant; the

plea of sudden fight and the case of a mother who causes the death of

her child under the age of twelve months when the balance of her mind

is disturbed by reason of her not having fully recovered from the effect

of giving birth to a child or by reason of the effect of lactation consequent

to the birth of the child.

For Exception No. 4, the following requisites must be satisfied: it was a

sudden fight; there was no premeditation; the act was committed in a

heat of passion; and the assailant had not taken any undue advantage

or acted in a cruel manner.”

In the case of The King v. Fernando [46 NLR 256] it was distinguished:

“The trial Judge explained “premeditation as if it was synonymous with

“intention”. There was, then, misdirection in that respect. The jury, in

view of that misdirection, and also in view of the observation made by

the Judge that if they were not satisfied that the condition “without

premeditation” was present on the evidence, they need not consider that

CA/HCC/0267-268/24

15 | P a g e

exception any further, probably refrained from such further

consideration.”

In the case of S.C. Appeal No. 168/2018, (decided on 25.7.2025) it was

further examined:

“The most relevant part in relation to the instant appeal of the said

Exception is the section that reads “… in a sudden fight in the heat of

passion upon a sudden quarrel”. The said exception speaks of sudden

fight which results upon a sudden quarrel. These phrases were used by

the Legislature to denote a position that reflects a transformation of a

quarrel to a fight within a very short duration of time. It is important to

note in this context that the word “sudden” appears twice in the text of

the said Exception and that too, after the phrase “without

premeditation”. The emphasis laid in the text of the section on the

spontaneity of the act which resulted in the death of a person is

therefore clearly recognisable.

The start of the quarrel and its escalation into a fight must happen

within a short duration of time. The emphasis placed by the Section on

the progressive but sudden escalation of the intensity of the degree of

passion with which the opposing parties acts in a quarrel culminating

with the act or acts that results in the fatality could easily be discerned

from the phrase “… in a sudden fight in the heat of passion upon a

sudden quarrel”

Further in the case of Palamura Hewage Harishchandra Kumarasinghe

v. Attorney General (CA HCC 0070/2023) it was held:

“Our Courts have considered that to qualify under Exception 4 to Section

294 of the Penal Code, the Accused has to establish that the incident

was committed without premeditation in a sudden fight in the heat of

an argument. C. Ananda Grero, Culpable Homicide, Proof and Defences,

CA/HCC/0267-268/24

16 | P a g e

1988 at page 69: "Gour in the Penal Law of India states: "Pre-meditation

may be established by direct or positive Evidence or by circumstantial

evidence. Evidence of pre-meditation can be furnished by former

grudges or previous threats and expressions of ill-feelings; by acts of

preparation to kill, such as procuring a deadly weapon or selecting a

dangerous weapon in preference to one less dangerous, and by the

manner in which the killing was committed. For example, repeated

shots, blows or other acts of violence are sufficient evidence of

meditation.”

The Counsel for the Appellants argued that the Learned High Court Judge

had not considered the relevant mitigating circumstances when she found

the Appellants guilty for the charges for which they were convicted. They

mainly submitted that before the incident, according to the Counsel there

was a verbal exchange that had happened between the parties and that the

injuries were inflicted as a result of the said verbal exchange and therefore,

the Appellants should have been convicted not for murder but for culpable

homicide not amounting to murder.

When the deceased and PW1 were enjoying a cigarette after dinner, the

Appellant had gone there and inquired from them why they do animalistic

acts towards them. When the deceased and PW1 countered and asked what

the animalistic act was done by them, and requested not to implicate them,

the Appellants immediately sprang into action and cut the deceased to death

and caused serious injuries to PW1. According to the evidence, the assault

was done immediately when the deceased and PW1 replied to the utterance

of the Appellant. Hence, no sudden fight had taken place between the parties.

Further, the Appellants had not taken up the defence of sudden fight during

the cross examination of the witnesses both at the non-summary and in the

High Court trial. They had taken the defence only at the later stage in their

CA/HCC/0267-268/24

17 | P a g e

dock statement. Had there been mitigatory circumstances, the Learned High

Court Judge would have considered the same in the trial.

The Learned High Court Judge in her judgment had considered the evidence

given by PW1 extensively and properly analyzed his evidence in its correct

perspective. Further, the Learned High Court Judge had reasonably

considered all direct and circumstantial evidence to come to her decision.

Next, both the learned Counsels, highlighting the following passage from the

judgment contended that the Learned High Court Judge had reversed the

burden of proof towards the Appellant. The relevant portion is re-produced

bellow:

Pages 427-428 of the brief.

úfYaIfhka Tyqf.a Nd¾hdj iy ujo ta wjia:dfõ ksjfia isá nj iajlSh ia:djrh jQfha ù

kï Tyqg ta wh w;=rska hful= cSj;=ka w;r isákafka kï le`oùfï yelshdjo mej;=ks'

Bg;a w;sf¾lj Tyqf.a wlaldo tu ksjig meñK l;d l< úg muKla fï .ek oek .;a

njg Tyq mjid ;snqK ksid Tyqf.a ifydaorsh o Tyq fjkqfjka idlaIshg le`oùug yelshdj

;snqks' tfy;a ta lsisfjl= Tyq idlaIshg le`ojd ke;' wfkla w;g me' id' 1 f.ka ,>q

fkdjk mrSlaIKfha oS yria m%Yak úuik úg Tyq lsisÿ wdldrhlska fuhg iïnkaO fkdjqKq

njg jk ia:djrh yd Tyq ta wjia:dfõ Tyqf.a ksjfiau /`oS isáhdh hk ia:djrh ms<sn`oj

fhdackdjla fyda ú;a;sh wrUhd isÿ lr ke;' tu ;;a;ajh mfil ;enQj;a uQ,slj i`oyka

l< hq;af;a ;uka ta wjia:dfõ ksjig ù ksodf.k isá njg Tyq i`oyka lr;a" tu lreK

wêlrKhg ta;a;= hk wdldrhg ;yjqre lsrSu i`oyd Tyqg myiqfjkau le`oùug yelshdj

;snQ Tyqf.a ,`.u ×d;Ska fyda le`oùula fkdlsrSu u; Tyqf.a ú;a;sjdplh ;yjqre ùula

isÿ ù fkdue;s njhs'

Where the prosecution presents overwhelming evidence, a prima facie case

is established, and as such a reverse burden makes it legally difficult or

almost impossible to be granted an acquittal, as the defendant would now be

fighting against undisputed facts brought by the prosecution. Thus, even

compelling arguments may not suffice to secure an acquittal.

Although, the above cited portion of the judgment is a clear misdirection, the

evidence presented by the prosecution is overwhelming and therefore, I

conclude that it will not affect the outcome of the judgment.

CA/HCC/0267-268/24

18 | P a g e

In the next ground both the learned Counsels raised the question whether

the Learned High Court Judge has correctly evaluated the dock statements

of the Appellants.

A dock statement is an unsworn statement an accused person makes from

the courtroom dock rather than giving sworn testimony. Evaluating it is

crucial because, while it lacks the full probative weight of cross-examined

evidence, it is legally treated as evidence that must be carefully assessed to

safeguard the defendant's right to a fair trial.

Even if the statement is not fully believed, if its content introduces a

reasonable doubt about the prosecution's case in the minds of the jury or

judge, the accused is legally entitled to an acquittal.

A dock statement refers to an unsworn statement made by an accused from

the courtroom dock rather than giving sworn testimony. The evaluation of

such statements would be extremely important, as they would be legally

considered to be evidence, and as such, must be carefully assessed to protect

the defendant’s right to a fair trial. Therefore, although a dock statement

would lack the full probative weight as cross-examined evidence would, it

still remains important to the case at hand. Further, even if the statement is

not fully believed, if its content is sufficient to create a reasonable doubt

regarding the prosecution’s case in the perspective of the jury or judge, the

accused would then legally be entitled to an acquittal.

In Queen V. Kularatne 71 NLR 529 at page 531 it was held that:-

“when an unsworn statement is made by the accused from the dock,

the jurors must be informed that such statement must be looked upon

as evidence, subject however to the infirmity that the accused had

deliberately refrained from giving sworn testimony. But the jury must

also be directed that,

CA/HCC/0267-268/24

19 | P a g e

(a) if they believe the unsworn statement, it must be acted upon,

(b) if it raises a reasonable doubt in their minds about the case for

the prosecution, the defence must succeed, and

(c) that it should not be used against another accused.”

The Learned High Court Judge had very correctly considered the dock

statements of the Appellants in its correct perspective. She had given

plausible reasons as to why she disregards the same. Therefore, it is

incorrect to say that the Learned High Court Judge had simply disregarded

the dock statements in her judgement.

In the final ground of appeal, both the Counsels contended whether the

sentenced imposed on the 5th is excessive, given the circumstances of the

case.

“Judicial discretion” or judicial sentencing freedom refers to an authority of

a judge to determine the appropriate penalty within statutory limits for each

case at hand. While judges would be independent and free from influence,

this does not grant absolute freedom; such determinations would be confined

within the limits of mandatory minimums, maximum sentences, appellate

precedents and structures sentencing guidelines.

In Sri Lanka, there is no single, unified statutory Sentencing Act or any other

codified sentencing guidelines for offences. Rather, sentencing is governed

by the directions of the Penal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure, and

as such, final penalties are imposed on the discretion of the judge, who would

be governed by the specified minimums and maximums in the statute.

According to the JMO, PW1 had sustained a cut injury on his right scapula

which had been categorised as grievous injury sufficient in the ordinary

course of nature to cause death. Under Section 300 of Penal Code the court

can sentence an Accused up to 20 years with a fine.

CA/HCC/0267-268/24

20 | P a g e

The Learned High Court Judge, after considering all mitigating and

aggravating circumstances submitted by both parties, correctly sentenced

the Appellants for 15 years rigorous imprisonment with a fine.

In this case the Learned High Court Judge had considered the evidence

presented by both parties to arrive at her decision. She has properly analyzed

the evidence given by both sides in her judgment. As the evidence adduced

by the Appellants failed to create a doubt over the prosecution’s case, the

conclusion reached by the Learned High Court Judge in this case cannot be

faulted.

In State of Uttar Pradesh v. M. K. Anthony [AIR 1985 SC 48] the court

held that:

“While appreciating the evidence of a witness, the approach must be

whether the evidence of the witness read as a whole appears to have a

ring of truth. Once that impression is formed, it is undoubtedly

necessary for the court to scrutinise the evidence more particularly

keeping in view the deficiencies, draw-backs and infirmities pointed out

in the evidence as a whole and evaluate them to find out whether it is

against the general tenor of the evidence given by the witness and

whether the earlier evaluation of the evidence is shaken as to render it

unworthy of belief. Minor discrepancies on trivial matters not touching

the core of the case, hyper-technical approach by taking sentences torn

out of context here or there from the evidence, attaching importance to

some technical error committed by the investigating officer not going to

the : root of the matter would not ordinarily permit rejection of the

evidence as a whole..…Even honest and truthful witnesses may differ

in some details unrelated to the main incident because power of

observation, retention and reproduction differ with individuals. Cross

examination is an unequal duel between a rustic and refined lawyer.”

CA/HCC/0267-268/24

21 | P a g e

In Sarkar on Evidence, 15th Edition at page 112, it is stated as follows:

“Minor discrepancies are possible even in the version of truthful

witnesses and such minor discrepancies only add to the truthfulness of

their evidence. [Sidhan v. State of Kerela [1986] Cri LJ 470, 473 (Kerala)].

But discrepancies in the statements of witnesses on material points

should not be lightly passed over, as they seriously affect the value of

their testimony (Brij Lal v. Kunwar, 36A 187: 18 CWN 649: A 1914 PC

38). The main thing to be seen in whether the inconsistencies go to the

root of the matter or pertain to insignificant aspects thereof. In the former

case, the defence may be justified in seeking advantage of the

incongruities obtaining in the evidence. In the latter, however no such

benefit may be available to it. (Krishna Pillai Sree Kumar v. State of

Kerala A [1981] SC 1237,1239).”

In The Attorney General v. Sandanam Pitchai Mary Theresa [2011] 2 SLR

292 the court held that:

“Whilst internal contradictions or discrepancies would ordinarily affect

the trustworthiness of the witness statement, it is well established that

the Court must exercise its judgment on the nature of the inconsistency

or contradiction and whether they are material to the facts in issue”.

As discussed under the appeal grounds advanced by the Appellants, the

prosecution has adduced strong and incriminating evidence against the

Appellants. The Learned High Court Judge had very correctly analyzed all

the evidence presented by all the parties and arrived at a correct finding that

the Appellants were guilty of committing the murder of the deceased and

committing attempted murder on PW1 in this case.

CA/HCC/0267-268/24

22 | P a g e

Therefore, I affirm the conviction and dismiss the Appeal of the Appellants.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgement to the High

Court of Ratnapura along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL