1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CN191/2010 H.C Colombo Case No 3296/2006

Before

Vs,

And,

Vs,

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Section 331 of

the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

COMPLAINANT

Gonapinuwalage Indrajith Sisira Kumara

ACCUSED

Gonapinuwalage Indrajith Sisira Kumara

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

COMPLAINANT - RESPONDENT

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J (PICA) &

H. C. J. Madawala J .

JI f ! li

\II

! i i i 1

2

Counsel: Neranjan Jayasinghe for the Accused-Appellant

Dilan Ratnayake SSC for the AG

Argued On: 23.09.2015

Written Submissions on: 22.10.2015

Order On: 29.01.2016

Order

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J (PICA)

The Accused-Appellant Gonapinuwalage Indrajith Sisira Kumara was indicted before the High Court

of Colombo for possession of 5.1 grams of Heroin on 03.02.2001 an offence punishable under section

54A (d) of the Poisons Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended by Act No. 13 of 1984.

The Learned High Court Judge of Colombo by Judgment dated 11.01.2010 convicted the Accused-

Appellant and sentenced him for life imprisonment. Being dissatisfied with the said conviction and

sentence the Accused -Appellant had preferred this appeal.

During the argument before us Accused -Appellant raised several grounds of appeal including

a) improbabilities in the prosecution version of this case

b) failure by the prosecution to establish the inward journey of the production chain

c) failure by the Learned Trial Judge to give due consideration to the defence taken up by

the Accused-Appellant in the Trial Court

being the main grounds of Appeal.

I will now turn to the prosecution version of the present case. The prosecution has mainly relied on the

evidence of the following witnesses at the trial.

II, ,lIII I

3

1. Sub Inspector Dehiwaduge

2. PC 20530 Sunil Bandara

3. Assistant Government Analyst Bandumala Perera

As admitted by both parties the officers of Kirulapana Police Station were engaged in a raid on

08.02.2001. According to the evidence of Sub Inspector Dehiwaduge, he had gone to Siddartha Road

via High Level Road along with a police party consist of PC Sunil Bandara, PC Rajendra, PC Jayasiri,

PC Gamage and police assistance Silva.

When they reached Siddartha Road junction near the Kirulapana Bridge, he had seen a person taking

to his heels after seeing the police party. He further observed something fallen from the running

person. He identified the person as the Accused-Appellant, but they could not apprehend him at that

time. Witness Dehiwalage had recovered a small parcel dropped by the Accused-Appellant and the

said parcel contained several small packets wrapped in a white paper put inside a cellophane bag. The

said parcel was in the custody of SI Dehiwaduge until they returned to the station and thereafter the

parcel was handed over to witness Bandara with instructions for him to go to the Police Narcotic

Bureau and get the parcel weighed. When PC Bandara returned to the police station with two covers

the said covers were sealed by him and handed over to the reserve PC 27296 Nimal.

According to witness Dehiwaduge, the said parcels were with the reserve until the Accused-Appellant

was arrested by him on 04.02.2002 at Kalinga Mw, Kirulapana. The said productions were sent to the

Government Analyst on 15.02.2002.

Witness Bandara in his evidence had corroborated the evidence given by Sub Inspector Dehiwaduge.

According to this witness when he gave a chase to the Accused, he saw something dropping on the

bridge, whilst running away.

According to him, the unsealed parcel which was recovered near the Kirulapana Bridge was handed

over to him by SI Dehiwaduge at the police station and he had gone to the Police Narcotic Bureau

I,,! III,

! l I I I ! j I I I I I I I I 1 I

4

along with the said unsealed parcel and handed over the parcel to P.S. Wimalarathne of Police

Narcotic Bureau for weighing and sealing purposes. Weighing was done by P.S Wimalarathne in

presence of the witness and he placed his signature with date and placed the seal on the parcel at that

time. The two sealed parcels received by him from P.S. Wimalarathne were duly handed over to

SI Dehiwaduge on the same day.

The next witness summoned by the prosecution was Bandumala Perera an Assistant Government

Analyst from the Government Analyst Department. According to her evidence PC 10757 Fonseka had

handed over the parcel to the Government Analyst Department and a receipt was issued dated

15.02.2002.

The examination of the parcel too was carried out by the witness and according to her when she

opened the parcel in addition to the seals she observed some unclear fingerprints on the parcel.

When the case for the prosecution was closed and the rights of Accused was explained the Accused

opted to make a dock statement, and in his dock statement, he has admitted a police party led by SI

Dehiwaduge visiting his house and questioning him after showing him a parcel on 08.02.2001 but

denied arresting him on that day. He further speaks of visiting Fort and Borella police station on that

day with six others to ascertain whether he was wanted by any police.

However on 04.02.2002 when he went to push a broken police jeep on the road, SI Dehiwaduge who

was there had arrested him saying that there is a warrant on him.

As referred by me earlier, one of the main arguments raised by the counsel for the Accused Appellant

was the improbability of the prosecution story. The counsel argued that considering the street value, no

person would throw a parcel carrying 9 grams and 790 mg of Heroin when he could easily escape as

described by the prosecution witnesses.

I ! IIf f

I j

1 I I I I I i I I ! I I I I I I i I I i I i I I 1 I l I I !

5

However we observe that none of the prosecution witness said that the parcel was thrown but what

they said was that they saw parcel being dropped when he was running away. In such a situation, one

cannot expect a person to pick the parcel and take it along with him, when police officers are giving a

chase to him. Under these circumstances we cannot agree with the argument raised by the Accused-

Appellant.

Counsel for the Accused-Appellant further argued that the prosecution has failed to establish the

inward journey of the productions to the Government analyst.

In this regard I am mindful the decision in Perera V. Attorney General 1998 (1) Sri LR 378 where

J.A.N. de Silva (1) (as he was then) held that "The most important journey is the inwards journey

because the final Anal yst Report will depend on that.

As the Defendant had admitted the correctness of the procedure adopted by the prosecution in sending

the production to the Analyst Department he is estopped from contesting the validity of the correctness

of the Analyst Report even if the prosecution had not led in evidence the receipt of acceptance of the

productions by the Analyst Department."

When considering this argument I observe the following admissions recorded during the High Court

Trial.

Page 120; @~o~ qoo:))~8 qoO) 1/2000 (.)0@05 GO @O)@O oOt::iWO) @~&O~@<35

&eO)O(,)) o8~ ~L,J O)Q)) GO@OO) &60)0(,)) 0,5) @O).@O)) 27296 &@@

&eO)o(.))() 2001.02.08 ~,5) C):))O~@@~ q,5)qOlO CJO)l~ 80 OO@Q Oc.:l

ol3t::iWE3) @~O)oq@(!)~qC) @OO) ~L) (.)rno05 O)05o@Q 6)(.)~ 2002.02.15

@O& ~,5) @O).@E3)) 10757 @('))~@0E3)) &60)0(,)) o8~ @(3),5)@(5))0 rn)O~@

tJrn ,5)l00) @rn)GjE3)O0(')O ~~O) C5J)~C) @(3),5)c)@(!) c.:l)t:.JWq@(.) qoO)O

Ir

!i!t!rfI II!I

II

!I

I I I I i I I i I I ! I i ! I I I I I I I

6

qo6)C) ,5)~oC)),5) CJo~~@c5 420 o (5)dJBx;J GJ()@o) 86(5)l~cl @~CJ

CJ()~dJ t:5)6 O)~~.

The above admission recorded at the Trial Court had covered the period commencing from 08.02.2001

when the said sealed productions were handed over to the reserve up to handing over the production to

the High Court. The only step which was not covered by the said admission is the period commencing

from the time of detection up to the handing over the production to SI Dehiwaduge by PC Bandara.

The court observes that the transaction took place during this period has been covered by the two

witnesses Dehiwaduge and PC Bandara as I have discussed earlier in this judgment.

According to the evidence of PC Bandara, weighing of the productions was taken place at the Police

Narcotic Bureau (PNB) by PS Wimalaratne of Police Narcotic Bureau (PNB) but it took place in his

presence. In fact it is PC Bandara who sealed the productions and placed the signature on the two

parcels.

In the case of Walimunige John and Another V. The State 76 NLR 485 at 496 GPS de Silva SP J (as

he was then) concluded "the question of presumption arises only where a witness whose evidence is

necessary to unfold the narrative is withheld by the prosecution and the failure to call such witness

constitutes a vital missing link in the prosecution case and where the reasonable inference to be drawn

from the omission to call the witness is that he would if called not have supported the prosecution. But

where one witness' evidence is cumulative of the other and would be a mere repetition of the

narrative, it would be wrong to direct a jury that the failure to call such witness gives rise to a

presumption under section 114 (t) of the Evidence Ordinance.

Counsel for the Accused-Appellant further argued that it is unsafe to act on the evidence of PC

Bandara alone since what he took was an unsealed parcel. However I observe that the said parcel was

first taken in charge by SI Dehiwaduge and handed over to PC Bandara and both these witnesses had

given evidence to that effect. These two witnesses are members of the raiding party too. The evidence

tfJ$

r

!i Ir

ft!

i IiI,

7

of the above two officers were corroborated each other and no contradictions were marked during the

High Court trial.

Counsel for the Accused -Appellant brought to our notice the evidence of witness Bandumala Perera

the Assistant Government Analyst who examined the production. In her evidence she referred to an

unclear fingerprint in the parcel she examined. Even though the Counsel argued that it is unsafe to act

on her evidence since there is a doubt with regard to the parcel on the strength of the above evidence

but, we observe that the said evidence was not challenged before the High Court and therefore the

above evidence alone will not make the prosecution version unacceptable before us.

In the case of Gunasiri and Two Others V. Republic of Sri Lanka 2009 1 SLR 39 justice Sisira de

Abrew whilst referring to a decision in Indian Supreme Court concluded as follows.

"Although the 3rd Accused-Appellant raised an alibi in his dock statement, he failed to suggest

this position to prosecution witnesses. The Learned Counsel who appeared for the defence did

not suggest to the prosecution witnesses the alibi raised by the 3rd Accused Appellant. What is

the effect of such silence on the part of the counsel. In this connection I would like to consider

certain judicial decisions. In the case of Sarwan Singh V. State of Punjab 2002 AIR SC III at

3656 Indian Supreme Court held thus "It is a rule of essential justice that whenever the

opponent has declined to avail himself of the opportunity to put his case in cross examination it

must follow that the evidence tendered on that issue ought to be accepted." This judgment was

cited with approval in Bobby Mathew V. State of Karnataka 2004 Cr. U 3003.

Applying the principles laid down in the above judicial decision, I may express the following

view. Failure to suggest the defence of alibi to the prosecution witnesses, who implicated the

accused, indicates that it was a false one. Considering all these matters I am of the opinion that

the defence of alibi raised by the 3rd Accused Appellant is an afterthought."

..

8

As referred by me earlier in this judgment the Accused-Appellant in his dock statement had admitted a

police team visiting his house and SI Dehiwaduge questioning him with regard to a parcel the said

police officer had in his possession at that time. Whilst referring to the date of arrest he referred to an

incident took place when he went to help a police party and further said that SI Dehiwaduge was not in

good terms with him.

The Learned Senior State Counsel who represented the Attorney General before us took up the

position that the above position taken by the Accused-Appellant in his dock statement had not been

suggested to any of the prosecution witnesses and therefore it is wrong to conclude that the Learned

Trial Judge had not given due consideration to the dock statement of the Accused-Appellant. He

brought to our notice the reasons given by the Learned Trial Judge when rejecting the dock statement.

When considering the above argument and especially the decision of the Indian Supreme Court in

Sarawan Sing V. State of Punjab I see no merit in the third argument raised by the Accused-

Appellant.

For the reasons set out above I see no reason to interfere with the findings of the Learned High Court

Judge. I therefore up holding the judgment, conviction and the Sentence of the Learned Trial Judge

dismiss the appeal as devoid of merit.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

H.C.J. Madawala J

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Appeal dismissed

ti

~IIII

I!II!