1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRAIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

In the matter of an Appeal from the High Court of

Badulla under section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979

Court of Appeal case no. CA 227/13

H.C. Badulla case no. 2/2008

Before

Counsel

Attorney General

Complainant

Vs.

W.D.Ajith Kumara Dissanayake

Accused

And Now Between

W.D.Ajith Kumara Dissanayake

Accused - Appellant

Vs.

Attorney General

Complainant - Respondent.

: L. T.B. Dehideniya J. (PICA)

: K.K. Wickramasinghe J.

: Dulinda Weerasooriya PC with Chamath Marapana and

Kanishka Silva for the Accused Appellant.

: Madawa Tennakoon SSC for the Complainant Respondent.

2

Argued on : 10.07.2017 and 04.08.2017

Written submissions filed on 06.09.2017

Decided on : 31. 10.2017

L.T.B. Dehideniya J. (PICA)

The Accused Appellant Was indicted before the High Court of

Badulla on a charge of murder of Senawirathne Mudiyanselage

Padmalika Priyadarshani on or about 03rd September 2005, punishable

under section 296 Of the Penal Code. After trial the Appellant was

convicted and sentenced to death. Being aggrieved, the appellant

presented this appeal.

The first ground of appeal is that the learned High Court Judge had

failed to sufficiently complied with the mandatory requirement of section

195 (e e) of the Criminal Procedure Code Act No. 15 of 1979 as amended

which amounts to non complies.

Section 195 ( e e) of the Criminal Procedure Code reads thus;

195. Upon the indictment being received in the High Court, the

Judge of the High Court presiding at the sessions of the High

Court holden in the judicial zone whereat the trial is to be held

shall-

(a) ... .. .

(b) ... .. .

(c) ... .. .

(d) .... .

(e) .... .

3

(ee) if the indictment relates to an offence triable by a jury,

inquire from the accused whether or not he elects to be

tried by ajury".

The necessity to introduce this provIsIon m to the Criminal

Procedure Code arose because of the amendment made to the section 161

of the Code. Section 161 as amended reads

161. Subject to the provisions of this code or any other law, all

prosecutions on indictment instituted in the High Court shall be

tried by a Judge of that Court:

Provided that in any case where at least one of the offences falls

within the list of offences set out in the Second Schedule to the

judicature Act, No 2 of 1978, trial shall be by a jury, before a

Judge, if and only if, the accused elects to be tried by a jury.

By the proviso of this section the accused was given a right to try

his case by a jury. If the accused elects his case to be tried by a jury, the

Court has to take appropriate steps to try the case by a jury. To enforce

this right, an obligation or a duty casted upon the Judge, by section 195 (e

e), to inquire from the accused whether or not he elects to be tried by a

JUry.

There is a series of cases that the superior courts have held that the

non compliance is fatal and vitiate the conviction.

Wijesena Silva and others V. Attorney General [l998] 3 Sri L R

309

1. Court is required to inquire from the accused whether or not he

elects to be tried by a Jury. This is a duty imposed on the trial

4

judge upon receipt of indictment. This duty implies no discretion

but a mandatory obligation on the part of the High Court judge.

This is a recognition of the basic right of an accused person to be

tried by his peers.

Nimal Bandara V. The State [1996] 1Sri L R 214

(1) That the amendment to section 195 of the Criminal Procedure

Act by introducing sub -section (ee) was necessitated, as a result of

the introduction of new section 161 in place of the original section

161. Per Gunawardana, J, "it is to be noted that by virtue of the

new section 161 of the Criminal Procedure Code, whilst trials

before the High Courts are to be before the High Court Judge, a

right has been given to an accused under the Proviso to that

section, to elect to be tried by a jury in the specified offences.

This is a recognilion of the basic right of an accused person to be

tried by his peers".

Rajah and another V. Republic of Sri Lanka [1996] 2 Sri L R 403

(1) Failure of learned Trial Judge to comply with the provisions of

sections 195(ee) and (f) is a fatal irregularity which vitiates the

conviction.

(2) Accused should be given the opportunity to exercise the right

whether to be tried by a jury or not. This is a recognition of the

basic right of an accused person being tried by his peers.

5

(3) In view of the Amendment No. 11 of 1988 at a Trial before the

High Court, the Court is required to inquire from the accused

whether or, not he elects to be tried by a jury.

The requirement of inquiring from the accuse whether he exercise

his right to be tried by a jury has been expanded by Anil Goonarathne J in

the case of Kopiwattage Jayasinghe v. Hon. Attorney General C.A. No.

07/2011 CA Minute dated 28.11.2015 by holding that it is preferable to

record it in question and answer form. His Lordship further referred to

J.A.N.Silva J. in the case of S.C 24/2008 where it was held that;

As long as it is in the statute book that the accuse can elect to be

tried by a jury the trial fudge has an obligation not only to inquire

from him whether he is to be tried by a jury, judge must inform that

the accused has a legal right to that effect. Nonobservance of this

procedure is an illegality and not a mere irregularity.

and formulated two matters that are immerging from this section. They

are;

a. Trial Judge has an obligation to inquire from the accused whether

he elects to be tried by a jury,

b. Judge has to inform the accused that he had a right to that effect.

His Lordship further held that if ( a) and (b) above are not adhered

to, it could be argued that the Accused Appellant had been denied a fair

trial. The concept of a fair trial is imperative and recognized by the

Constitution, and could not be denied.

Article 3 of the Constitution contemplate that the sovereignty is

with the people and the Article 4 provides that the judicial power of the

people is exercised by Court through parliament. The Article 4 reads thus;

6

4 The Sovereignty of the People shall be exercised and enjoyed in

the following manner:-

(a) the legislative power of the People shall be exercised by

Parliament, consisting of elected representatives of the

People and by the People at a Referendum;

(b) the executive power of the People, including the defence

of Sri Lanka, shall be exercised by the President of the

Republic elected by the People;

(c) the judicial power of the People shall be exercised by

Parliament through courts, tribunals and institutions

created and established, or recognized, by the

Constitution, or created and established by law, except in

regard to matters relating to the privileges, immunities

and powers of Parliament and of its Members wherein the

judicial power of the People may be exercised directly by

Parliament according to law;

Trial by a jury is not a Constitutional provision. G.L.Peiris in his

book on Criminal Procedure in Sri Lanka 3rd edition at page 402 states

that "Under the laws of Sri Lanka trial by a jury is not tantamount to a

provision enacted by the Constitution, but is merely a creation of the

Legislature" The people, while exercising their legislative power through

the Parliament, they have retained their judicial power with them in

relation to the grave crimes such as murder, attempted murder and rape;

without handing them over to courts. Court has to be mindful of this fact

in asking for the jury option. The Accused must be informed of his right

to be tried his case by his peers. If not it amounts to a noncompliance of

section 195 (ee).

f>

7

In the present case the question put to the accused was not recorded

and further the accused was not informed of his right to be tried by a jury.

This seems to be a breach of section 195 (e e) of the Criminal Procedure

Code.

Therefore we proceed to set aside the conviction and sentence and

send the case back to the High Court for a fresh trial. We direct the

learned High Court Judge to give priority and conclude this case at his

earliest.

Fresh trial ordered.

President of the Court of Appeal

K.K. Wickramasinghe J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal