IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

M. Ragavan,

No.48/8,

Sri Siddhartha Path,

Kirulapone,

Colombo 5.

Plaintiff-Appellant

CA CASE NO: CA/814/2000/F

DC COLOMBO CASE NO: 15886/L

Vs.

Subramanium Deva,

Sandanam Pichche,

Both No. 30/5,

Station Road,

D.S. Colombage Mawatha,

Kirullapone,

Colombo 5.

Defendant-Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Rohan Sahabandu, P.C., for the Appellant.

A.K. Chandrakantha for the Respondent.

Decided on: 14.11.2019

2

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff filed this action against the two defendants seeking

declaration of title to the land described in the schedule to the

plaint, ejectment of the defendants therefrom, and damages.

The second defendant did not contest the case. The first

defendant filed the answer seeking dismissal of the plaintiffs

action and damages. After trial, the learned District Judge

dismissed the plaintiffs action with costs. This appeal by the

plaintiff is against the said Judgment.

In the Judgment the learned District Judge came to the strong

conclusions that: (a) the plaintiff is the rightful owner of the land

in suit; (b) the defendant has not proved prescriptive title to the

land; (c) the defendant has not proved damages.

The defendant does not challenge these findings of the learned

District Judge.

However, the learned District Judge dismissed the plaintiffs

action on the basis that the plaintiff has failed to prove the

identification of the land. In other words, if I understand

correctly, the plaintiff has failed to prove that the defendant is in

possession of the land described in the schedule to the plaint.

The land in suit is Lot 1204 in Final Partition Plan No.793

marked P1 at the trial. The plaintiffs mother became entitled to

that Lot by the Final Decree entered in Partition Case

No.14030/P marked P2. The mother has gifted that property to

the plaintiff by deed marked P3.

It is the position of the plaintiff that due to communal

disturbances in July 1983 he fled the area and returned after

3

about three years to find that the defendant is in possession of

the land. The defendant admitted in evidence that the plaintiffs

houses were burnt during that turbulent period1 (not by him),

and he (the defendant) served a jail sentence of nearly 5 years

for burning houses which belonged to Tamil people during those

riots.2

I cannot understand why the learned District Judge, first having

come to the conclusion that the plaintiff is the owner of Lot 1204

in Final Partition Plan No.793 marked P1, dismissed the

plaintiffs action on failure to identify the land, when the

defendant himself in evidence has clearly admitted that he lives

on the land which is the subject matter of this case3, and also

the counsel for the defendant has cross examined the plaintiff

on the basis that the defendant lives on the land in suit.4

It is my considered view that the learned District Judge has

misdirected himself on that point.

In the facts and circumstances of this case, the plaintiff has

proved that the defendant is in possession of the land in suit.

This is further made clear when one considers the defence of the

defendant. His defence was that he has acquired prescriptive

title to the land, which the learned District Judge held not to

have been proved.

For the aforesaid reasons, I set aside the Judgment of the

District Court and enter Judgment as prayed for in the prayer to

the plaint except damages.

1 Vide page 119 of the brief. 2 Vide pages 124-125 of the brief. 3 Vide pages 119 of the brief. 4 Vide page 86 of the brief.

4

Appeal is allowed with costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal