IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALISTIC

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

C. A. (Writ) No. 229/2013.

In the matter of an application for mandates in the nature of Writs of Mandamus, in term of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

1. Dr. Wanninayake Mudiyanselage Ranhamige Ranbanda (deceased), Kottayawatta, Hulugalla, Nikaweratiya.

1A. Dr. Wanninayake Mudiyanselage Ranbanda Jayathiake, Weda Niwasa, Kottayawatte, Hulugalla, N i kawe ratiya.

Substituted 1A Petitioner.

2. Chandrasekera Jayarathne Muiyanselage Wimalasena, Mahakirinda, Mahagirilla, Nikawaratiya.

3. Chandrasekera Jayarathne Mudiyanselage Bandara, Mahakirinda, Mahagirilla, Nikaweratiya.

4. Chandrasekera Jayarathne Gamini Chardrasekera, Mahagirilla, Nikaweratiya.

Mudiyanselage

Mahakirinda,

5. Chandrasekera Jayarathne Mudiyanselage jayasena, Mahakirinda, Mahagirilla, Nikaweratiya.

6. Chandrasekera

Udeni Sagarika, N i kawe ratiya.

Jayaratne Mundiyanselage Mahakirinda, Mahagirilla,

2

7. Chandrasekera Jayaratne Mundiyanselage Nadeeka Priyadarshini Mahakirinda J Mahagirilla J Nikaweratiya.

8. Adhikaree Mudiyanselage Harath Bandara Ranmenika Mahakirinda J Mahagirilla J Nikaweratiya.

9. Thennakoon Mudiyanselage Punchibandage somawathee J Mahakirinda J Mahagirilla J Nikaweratiya.

10.Hearth Midiyanselage Kapurubandage Dingiri Amma (deceasedL Nikaweratiya Haraha Hulugalla J Kottiyawatta J Bogahayaya J Nikaweratiya.

11. Dissanayake Mudiyanselage somawathee J sirisethagame J Hulawa.

12. Dissanayake Muidyanselage Kusumawathie J Kandegedera J Hulughalla.

13. Rasnayake Mudiyanselage Punchiralage Makkamma J Ipolagame J Mahawa.

14.Wanninayake Mudiyanselage Dingiri amma.

Hulawa J Olupaliyawa J Mahagirilla J Nikawaratiya.

15.Herath Mudiyanselage Wijesiri Herath J Mahakirinda J Mahagirilla J Nikaweratiya. PresidentJ Sa magi Govi sanvidhanaya J Kadawalagedera.

3

16. Wanninayake Mudiyanselage Hulawa, Sirisethagame, Secretary, Sa magi Govi Kadawalagedera.

Thilakeratne, Niikaweratiya, Sanvidanaya,

17.Samagi Govi Sanidanaya, Kadawalagedera, Mahagirilla.

PETITIONERS Vs.

1. P. Susantha Jayathilake, Divisional Secretary, Nikaweratiya,

2. W.M.C.K Wijekuruppu, Assistant Divisional Secretary, Nikaweratiya.

N.D. Pathirana, Assistant Divisional Secreatary. Nikaweratiya.

Substituted 2nd Respondent.

3. M.A.S. Weerashinghe, Commissioner-General of Agrarian Development, Department of Agrarian Development, No. 42, Sri Marcus Fernando Mawatha, Colombo 07.

4. G.B. Ashoka Swarnalatha, Deputy Commissioner of Agrarian Development, Department of Agrarian Development, District office, Kandy Road, Kurunegala.

5. Wanninayake Mudiyanselage Shantha Kumara Wanninayake,

4

Kandegedera Agricultural Research and Development Officer, Kandegedera.

6. Wanninayake Muiyanselage Dingiri Bandara,

Chairman, Sinha Govi Sanvidahanaya, Kandegedera.

7. Wanninayke Mudiyanselage Kiri Banda, Kandegedera, Hulugalla, Secretary Sinha Govi Sanvidhanaya, Kandegedera.

8. Sinha Govi Sanvidanaya, Kandegedera.

9. Hon. Nimal Siripala De Silva, Minister of Irrigation and water Resources Management, No. SOO, T.B Jayah Mawatha, Colombo 10. Hon. Wijith Wijayamuni Zoysa, Minister of Irrigation, No.SOO, T.B Jayah Mawatha, Colombo 10.

Substituted 9th Respondent.

10. Eng. Badra Kamaladasa,

Director General of Irrigation, Irrigation Department, No. 238, Bauddhaloka Mawatha, Colombo 07.

Eng. Y. Abdul Majeed, Acting Director General of irrigation, Irrigation Department, No. 238, Bauddhaloka Mawatha, Colombo 7.

Substituted 10th Respondent.

Before

Counsel:

5

11. H.M.P Hitisekera, District Secretary, Kachcheri Kurunegala.

Gamini lIangarathne,

District Secretary, Kachcheri, Kurunegala.

Substituted 11th Respondent.

12. S.M.W. Fernando. Surveyor General, Survey Department of Sri Lanka, No. 150, Kirula Road, Narahenpita.

P.M.P. Udayakantha, Surveyor general. Survey Department of Sri Lanka, No. 150,

Kirula Road, Narahenpita.

Substituted 12th Respondent.

13. Hon Attorney General.

E.A.G.R. Amarasekara, J.

Attorney General's Department, Hulftsdorp Street, Colombo 12.

Sanjewa Jayawardana P.e. with Charitha Rupasinghe for the Petitioner. M. Jayasinghe S.C for the Respondents except 6th, 7th and 8th

Respondents.

Decided on: 2018.09.21.

6

E.A.G.R. Amarasekara, J.

This is an application filed by the Petitioners praying for Mandates in the nature of

writs of Mandamus in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

6th, 7th and 8th Respondents have filed their statement of objections to the

application filed by the Petitioners. Petitioners in turn have filed their counter

Objections. However, these 6th, 7th and 8th Respondents did not take part in the

argument taken up on 17.05.2018. They were neither present nor represented by

a lawyer on that date. The learned counsel for the Petitioners made extensive oral

submissions and has later on filed his written submissions in support of the

petitioners' application.

Learned State Counsel who appeared for the other Respondents except for 6th, 7 th,

and 8th Respondents did not object to the application of the petitioners and further,

did not make any oral or written submissions.

The Petitioners are members of Sa magi Govi Sanvidhanaya, resident in the Village

of Kandegedera and Olupaliyawa. They earned their living by paddy cultivation in

ancient paddy fields surrounding the Kotuaththawala tank.

The Petitioners' allegation is that as a result of the illegal activities of some on the

other side of the tank, especially, the surreptitious lifting of its spill on the left side

by 8th Respondent in collaboration with the 5th Respondent, caused a massive

affectation to the petitioners and the rest of the villagers. Due to such illegal

activities, the Petitioners complain that,

1. Flood water and Rain water accumulate on the Petitioners' side of the said

tank.

2. The balanced distribution of the water volume to the opposite side was

hindered, causing the tank overflowing in large volumes to the petitioners'

7

paddy fields destroying those paddy fields by inundation. To support the

above, the Petitioners have tendered the Photographs marked as P7.

The Petitioners state that the spill ('Vana') is an in integral part of the bund of a

tank and is a natural outlet for excess water from the tank, which protects both the

dam and the bund from the excessive pressure from the water. They also bring to

the attention of this court that the spill also protects the surrounding paddy fields

located at the higher elevation of the tank from inundation.

To establish that some of the officials who are made Respondents to the Petition

have duties assigned to them by statutes, the Petitioners have brought this Court's

attention to the following provisions of Law.

1. Section 83 of the Agrarian Development, Act No. 46 of 2000

The said section provides as Follows;

((1. The Commissioner- General may, if it appears to him that any person has-

(a) Blocked up, obstructed or encroached upon or caused to be blocked

up, obstructed or encroached upon, damaged or caused to be

damaged, any irrigation channel, watercourse, bund, bank, reservation

tank, tank-reach or irrigation reserve; or

(b) Willfully or maliciously caused the waste of water conserved in any

irrigation work; or

(c) Without the prior written approval of the Commissioner-General

carried out any cultivation in, or removed earth from or caused earth

to be removed from, a tank, canal within the catchment area or from a

minor irrigation channel, water course, bund, bank, reservation tank,

dam, tank-reach or irrigation reserve,

make an order requiring such person to take such remedial measures as

are specified in the order."

(Every person who fails to comply with an order made under subsection

(1) is guilty of an offence under Section 83 (3) of the same act). Since the

said tank is a reservation tank and further, the spill is a part of the bund to

8

the tank, the Petitioners point out that the Commissioner General of

Agrarian Development can act under the aforesaid section. Furthermore,

raising of the spill level blocks and obstructs the flow of water till it reaches

the new level.

2. Section 65 of the Irrigation Ordines No. 32 of 1946 as amended.

This Section provides as follows;

(({1) Where any person obstructs or encroaches upon any ela, channel,

watercourse, or tank, or causes damage to any ela, channel, water

course or tank or any irrigation structure connected to such ela,

channel, water course or tank, it shall be lawful for the Government

Agent, by notice in writing served on such person, to require him within

such time as may be specified in the notice to remove or abate such

obstruction or encroachment or to repair such damage.

{2} If any person serve with a notice under subsection {1} refuses or neglects

to comply with the requirements of such notice within the specified

time, or if there is any doubt as to who is the proper person to be

served with such notice, it shall be lawful for the Government Agent to

cause such obstruction or encroachment to be forthwith removed or

abated or such damage to be repaired; and for that purpose it shall be

lawful for the Government Agent to enter any land or premises, with

such workmen, instruments and things as may be necessary, and to

proceed to do therein, or cause to be done, all such things as may be

necessary for such removal or abatement or repair" { However these

provisions has to be read together with the provisions of Transfer Of

Powers{ Divisional Secretaries}, Act No.58 of 1992 which substituted

the expression (( the Government Agent" by the expression ((the

Divisional Secretary". Section 9 of the said Act No.58 of 1992 makes

provisions to include an Assistant Divisional Secretary who is

authorized by the Divisional Secretary within the expression of the

Divisional Secretary.}

9

In support of their application the learned counsel for the Petitioner brought this

court's attention to several documentations which in turn establish the inaction of

the state functionaries with regard to the harm caused though they are vested with

powers conferred upon them by the above quoted sections.

It must be noted that though the reliefs are sought against them, none of the state

functionaries filed any objections or made any submissions to resist the petitioners'

application. As submitted by the Petitioners, it appears that there is a tacit

admission of their failure to do the duties as envisaged by law.

Since 2003, the Petitioners have been writing to many authorities, including the

then President of the country, relevant ministers and government officials. (vide

P11, P12, P14, P17, P20, P22, P28, P36, P39, P40 and P50 etc.). P52 dated

30.08.2012 appears to be the letter of demand sent through their lawyer to the

District Secretary of Kurunegala with copies to all the relevant state functionaries.

In reply to the complaint made to His Excellency the President of the Country, the

Secretary to the President had directed the Deputy Director of Irrigation,

Kurunegala to conduct an inquiry and submit a report (vide P17 dated 06.04.2006

and P18 dated 05.05.2006).

Thereafter by document marked as P19 dated 22.06.2006, the Zonal Director of

Irrigation, Kurunegala has replied to the Secretary to the President stating that no

renovation/restoration had been made to the Kotuaththawala tank by the

Irrigation Department. This indicates that the raising of the spill level was not done

by the said authority.

By P20 dated 21.08.2006, Sa magi Govi Sanvidhanaya, i.e., The Association of the

Petitioners, has complained to the Additional Commissioner of Agrarian Services

about the destruction caused by the raising of the spill level without consulting the

Engineers and has requested to restore the spill level to the status quo ante.

10

By P22 dated 28.03.2007, again one of the Petitioners has complained to the

Divisional Secretary, Kotawehera and requested to remedy the situation that has

affected about 20 acres of paddy land.

By P23 written in March 2007, the Land Officer on behalf the Provincial Land

Commissioner, in response to a letter written to him by the Secretary of the

Petitioners' Govi Sanvidhanaya, has referred the matter to Agrarian Development

Commissioner since, as per the said letter, it comes under the purview of that

Department.

P24 dated 03.04 2007, is a letter written by the Deputy Director of Irrigation to

Zonal Director of Irrigation, requesting him to expedite his report to be sent to the

Presidential Secretariat.

P 25 dated 05.01.2010 is a letter written by the Deputy Commissioner of Agrarian

Development through the Regional Engineer to the Senior Assistant Engineer with

copies to some of the state officers including the Divisional Secretary. By this, he

has asked the Senior Assistant Engineer to act without delay to solve the issue by

demarcating the spill level according to a new survey.

The aforesaid letter marked P25 indicates that the Deputy Commissioner of

Agrarian Development had recognized an issue that has to be solved by

demarcating the spill level and furthermore, without delay.

P26 is a report addressed to the Divisional Secretary, Nikaweratiya by a licensed

surveyor named L.H.S. Amaradasa, referring to a letter dated 23.02.2010, setting

out details of a survey that he had done. This report establishes that;

i. He did his survey using an old village plan

ii. He laid the boundaries on the ground by fixing wooden pegs.

iii. In certain areas he was not able to lay the common boundaries on the

ground as the areas not belonging to the State were totally inundated.

Thus, the aforesaid P26 supports the petitioners' stance that private lands are

inundated.

11

P By 27 dated 03.05.2010, the Deputy Commissioner of Agrarian Development had ,.. written to the Irrigation Engineer, Nikaweratiya referring to the matters that had

arisen with regard to the spill level. While referring to the complaint made by the

1st Petitioner, the aforesaid Deputy Commissioner had mentioned that it had been

reported that this change of spill level was done by the office of the Irrigation

Engineer, Nikaweratiya. The Deputy Commissioner had requested the aforesaid

Irrigation Engineer to consider the basis on which the spill level was established

and tender his recommendations.

P29 dated 07.07.2010 appears to be a reminder sent to the Irrigation Engineer,

Nikaweratiya in relation to P27, but it should be noted that as far back as in 2006,

by P19 dated22. 06.2006, with copies to the Agrarian Development Office, Zonal

Director of Irrigation had communicated to Secretary to the President that this task

of raising the spill level was not done by the Office of the Irrigation Engineer,

Nikaweratiya. In such a backdrop the Deputy Commissioner of Agrarian

Development should have been aware that the office of the Irrigation Engineer,

Nikaweratiya had not been involved in the raising of the spill level, but even in 2010

he was writing and sending reminders to the same office of the Irrigation Engineer,

Nikaweratiya. Though, in responding to the aforesaid letter, the Irrigation Engineer,

Nikaweratiya had written to the Agrarian Development Office with copies to

relevant Government Officers and interested parties (vide P30) informing them to

be present by the Tank at 10.30 A.M. on 30. 05.2010 for an inspection, by P31 dated

13.08.2010 he had again written back to the Deputy Commissioner Agrarian

Development informing that his office had not been involved in the renovation

done to the Kotuaththawala tank.

Thereafter, the Deputy Commissioner of Agrarian Development had written to the

Regional Irrigation Engineer of Wariyapola requesting his recommendations (vide

P32 dated 15.09.2015), and again he had sent a reminder in October (vide P33), but

by P34 dated 01.11.2010 the Regional Engineer, Wariyapola has responded stating

they did not have any file with regard to the matter in issue - i.e., the raising of the

spill level.

Thereafter, by letter dated 21.02.2011 marked as P35, the Deputy Commissioner

of Agrarian Development had written to the Director Wayamba Engineering

12

Department stating that the said Engineering Department of Wayamba had done

the raising of spill level and fixing the spill level to solve the issue of inundation of

private lands would be appropriate. He further had requested Director Wayamba

Engineering to take steps to solve the problem. In this letter the said Deputy

Commissioner of Agrarian Development states that the raising of the spill level had

been done by Wayamba Engineering Department. Since the same officer had

written to Irrigation Engineer, Nikaweratiya and Irrigation Engineer, Wariyapola

(vide P27 and P 32) stating that it was reported that those offices had done the

raising of the spill level, it is not clear how he came to know that it was done by the

Wayamba Engineering office. However, it is quite surprising that the Deputy

Commissioner of Agrarian development or his department was not aware who or

which institution had done the raising of the spill level till he wrote P35 to Director

Wayamba Engineering Department.

a) Was the raising of spill level done secretly?

b) Was there no proper co-ordination between the relevant government

departments or officers during and after the renovation project (if any) of

the said tank or;

c) Is it because of the lackadaisical approach of the relevant officers due to

some unknown reasons?

Whatever it may be, P35 confirms that;

1. The Deputy Commissioner of Agrarian Development was aware and had

identified the problem caused by the raising of spill level.

2. It has to be remedied by establishing the spill levels in a manner that solves

the inundation of private lands.

3. That Priority should be given to a speedy remedial measure.

(Please see the contents of P35)

P38 dated 08.08.2011, a letter addressed to the Director Wayamba Engineering

Department by Regional Engineer, Wariyapola reveals that;

1. Left spill level is higher than the right spill level by 250 mm.

13

2. The relevant paddy fields are at a lower level than the left spill level by

between 50 mm to 500 mm.

3. As per the Village Plan relevant paddy fields have been identified as private

lands and flDeniya".

4. By lowering the spill level of the left spill, the speed of the water flow can be

enhanced to decrease the length of time of an inundation.

The contents of the aforesaid letter too confirm the difference between right and

left spill levels as well as that the paddy fields were inundated. However, this letter

with reference to the village Plan states that even at the time that the village plan

was made, the said lands were inundated as those parts of paddy fields have been

described therein as fDeniya'

fDeniya' may be a term to describe a certain type of a low land but the photographs

marked as P 7 show that the lands in questions are completely inundated.

However, this letter further indicates that by lowering the spill level, it is possible

to reduce the time interval of inundation that affects paddy fields. In other wards

this letter establishes that paddy field are inundated due to the difference between

spill levels. Even the letter marked P8 dated 21.03.2012 written by Regional

Engineer, Wariyapola to Divisional Secretary, Nikaweratiya establishes that higher

level of the left spill has caused the inundation exceeding the limits of the tank.

It should be noted that certain communications with regard to a survey had taken

place and a survey was done prior to the aforesaid letter marked P8 - (vide P41,

P42, P43, P44 and Annexure to P44.) As per the contents of the letter marked P44,

it appears that even the Divisional Secretary, Nikaweratiya has identified that there

is an issue to be solved. By P45 dated 28.03.2012, the Assistant Divisional

Secretary, Nikaweratiya had written to the Deputy commissioner of Agrarian

Development to fix the spill levels under the supervision of his department.

Accordingly, the Deputy Commissioner of Agrarian Development has written to the

Regional Engineer for technical assistance and the Regional Engineer has agreed to

provide the technical assistance (vide P46 and P47 written in April 2012). P48

sheds light with regard to the solution to the issue. By that letter the Deputy

Commissioner of Agrarian Development after considering the reports given to him

by his Assistant Engineer informs the Divisional Secretary that, to avoid the

14

inundation of private lands, the spill level has to be lowered by 0.760 meters. This

shows that after spending so many years and taking surveys and reports of the

engineers, the relevant Authorities have come to a decision with regard to a

solution by 25th April 2012.

Surprisingly, the same Deputy Commissioner of Agrarian Development, who wrote

the aforesaid P48, has communicated to the Divisional Secretary of Nikaweratiya

to delay the lowering of spill level - Vide P49 written in May 2012. The reason

appears to be a request made by the 8th Respondent Sinha Govi Sanvidhanaya. It

further appears, after spending about another 3 months, that the same office has

communicated to the 8th Respondent to deposit survey fees for another survey.

This Court observes even in P13, P27, P30, P32 written in 2005 and 2010 in relation

to this matter, copies had been issued to said Sinha Govi Sanvidhanaya. Further, in

P14, P20, P36 written in 2005, 2006 and 2011 on behalf Petitioners, there are

references to the involvements of Sinha Govi Sanvidhanaya. The above

communications indicate that relevant State officers were well aware about the

involvement of Sinha Govi Sanvidhanaya or its relationship to or interest in the

issue from the beginning. At the same time Sinha Govi Sanvidhanaya should have

known the there were complaints made against the raising of the spill and the steps

were taking to solve the problem.

If the 8th Respondent or its members wanted to present their grievances, if any, it

had ample time from 2005. Even the state functionaries had enough time to

inquire into any grievance of the 8th Respondent and its members.

On the other hand, the relevant State officials have not placed before this Court

any grievance tendered by the 8th Respondent or its members before them. They

have neither pleaded before this court that the raising of the spill was done with

the approval of the relevant authorities.

In such a backdrop the recommendation to delay the lowering of the spill level in P

49 by the Deputy Commissioner of Agrarian Services, which is not compatible with

his own findings in P48, is questionable.

15

The aforesaid circumstances impel this court to infer that the relevant authorities

were either;

1. Biased towards Sinha Govi Sanvidhanaya or

2. Subjected to the influence of a powerful and intrusive hand, which was not

revealed in these proceedings.

If not, it may be a classic instance of the lethargic, apathetic, lackadaisical

approach of the relevant State officers in solving the problem and such

indifference has caused the suffering of the Petitioners for such a long period

giving undue advantage to the 8th Respondent and its members.

In their objection filed, the 6th, 7th and 8th Respondents themselves have stated

that members of their organization would be gravely prejudiced and a grave

injustice would be caused to their families by the reliefs prayed for by the

Petitioners. The 6th and 7th Respondents are the President and the Secretary of

the 8th Respondent. As per the Petitioners, they have been actively involved in

the matter forming the subject matter of this application. In such a situation, I

do not think the preliminary objections with regard to making them, namely the

6th, 7th and 8th Respondents, parties to this application hold any water.

The 6th, 7th and 8th Respondents in their objection have stated that the left spill

level was increased on the directions given by the r t to 4th Respondents but

they do not submit any document containing such a direction. Neither have the

1st to 4th Respondents admitted such a direction given by them. Though the 6th,

4th and 8th Respondent complained of prejudices and injustices that may be

caused by reducing the spill level or by granting reliefs as prayed for by the

Petitioners, they do not describe how such reliefs cause prejudices and

injustices to them.

On the other hand, raising of the spill level has already caused harm to the

Petitioners. There is no material before this court that the raising of the spill

.9i"~'r\ level was done after an unbiased and impartial consideration by the relevant

"-authorities of the plight caused by such acts towards the petitioners. The

..

16

aforementioned facts establish that while knowing the solution and having the

authority to solve it, the state functionaries were inactive in resolving it.

In such circumstances I take the view that this court must issue mandates in the

nature of mandamus to compel the performances of duties enjoined by law.

Hence, I allow the application and issue writs of Mandamus as prayed for in

prayers C, D, E, F, G and H of the Petition of this application.

E. A.G.R. Amarasekara.

Judge of the court of appeal.