Page 1 of 5

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

H.P.D.S. Gunawardena (Deceased)

A.M. Nita Chandrawatha,

No.356, Naiwala Road, Udugampola.

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant.

Case No.CA/(PHC)92/2015

Gampaha PHC Case No: Writ 07/2013

Vs.

G.D. Upali Dharmasena,

No.348A, Naiwala Road, Udugampola.

And 06 Others

Complainant-Respondent-Respondent

Commissioner General of Agrarian Development,

Department of Agrarian Development, Colombo 07.

And 02 Others.

Respondent-Respondents

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent

Before: PRESANTHA DE SILVA, J. &

K.K.A.V. SWARNADHIPATHI, J.

Page 2 of 5

Counsel: S.A.D.S. Suraweera

(For the Appellant)

Chathura Galhena

(For the Complainant Respondent-Respondent)

Rajin Gunarathne, (S.C.)

(For the 8th, 9th and the 10th Respondent-Respondents)

Argued on: 27.10.2021

Decided on: 24.03.2022

K.K.A.V. SWARNADHIPATHI, J.

JUDGMENT

The Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant filed the Petition of Appeal on 06.08.2015 in respect of the

order of the High Court of Gampaha pronounced on 22.07.2015 in the case bearing No.07/13

(Writ).

The Petitioner had prayed for;

(a) To set aside the order entered on 22.08.2015 in the case bearing No.07/13/Writ by the High

Court Judge of Gampaha

(b) To grant the prayer of the Petition filed in the High Court

(c) Cost

(d) Any other reliefs.

The Respondent-Petitioner filed the case bearing No.07/13/Writ in the High Court of Gampaha on

28.06.2013. By that Petition, they had challenged an order of the Assistant Agrarian Development

Page 3 of 5

Commissioner of Gampaha District entered in terms of Section 90 of the Agrarian Development

Act No.46 of 2000.

They had prayed to cancel the order [P1] by a writ of certiorari. Once the notice was issued, the

Complainant-Respondents and the Respondents appeared before the Court and was argued.

Counsel represented all parties, and written submissions were filed at the inquiry. On those

pleadings and written submissions, the order was delivered.

The Appellants had argued at the High Court that the Perakum farmer organisation, through a legal

entity, had no status to file a complaint under Section 90 of the Agrarian Development Act.

Therefore, accepting the complaint and holding an inquiry is ultra-virus. The order marked as [P1]

has no legal binding or authority. They further stated that the land they bought for a fair

consideration was named Meegahawatha. It was bought for residential purposes, and there was

no access road to paddy fields or a threshing floor. The agrarian officers had not considered this

position. Therefore, the findings of the inquiry are not fair and done with bias.

Once the High Court Judge delivered the order refusing to accept the version of the Petitioners.

They moved up in appeal. The parties filed their written submissions, and then the case was taken

for argument.

At the argument, the Appellant held that the Perakum farmer organisation is not a natural person.

Therefore, it cannot file a case or a Petition in Court. Only natural persons can complain under the

Act was not considered by the High Court Judge.

Document marked [P1] is a letter by the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Development of

Gampaha to the Petitioner-Appellants. It refers to a site inspection and an inquiry held. Ending the

letter, it had stated that if unsatisfied, the party could file a written appeal to a competent court.

What is a competent court is stipulated in Section 42 of the Agrarian Development Act 2000. The

section reads as follows: -

Page 4 of 5

The decision of an Agrarian Tribunal on an application, complaint or appeal referred to it shall

be final. Provided that an aggrieved party may prefer an appeal to the Court of Appeal within

thirty days of the receipt by him of such decision on a question of law.

Therefore, the Petitioners must prove to the satisfaction of the Court that he had exhausted all other

avenues available to him. It is essential to consider his conduct at the inquiry on the 6th of August

2012 inquiry notes that Nita Adhikari Gunawardena Respondent not present but had sent a letter

stating she would not participate in the inquiry. It was decided to inform her by writing to appear

before the inquiry officer, to which she had responded by sending an affidavit. That affidavit was

marked as [P3] and read that she would not participate. She had claimed that there was no pathway

or a thrashing floor in the affidavit.

As the decision of the Agrarian Officer was final, it was her duty to face the inquiry, give evidence

and face cross-examination mere, saying that there was no pathway, or a thrashing floor would not

help her. This proves that she had not acted diligently. Can she claim that she had exhausted all

remedies available to her? Therefore, she cannot now complain about a question of law. Section

42 had permitted to file of a case only when there is a question of law.

Another point to consider is that one who complains must do so after complying. In other words,

comply and complain is a golden rule observed by our courts. In this instance, the Petitioner-

Appellant had failed this test. She had not complied. She had refused to participate in the inquiry.

Therefore, she cannot now complain.

The Respondents argued that necessary parties were not named. The Appellants argued that the

Perakum farmer organisation is not a natural person to be added. However, section 43(3) of the

Agrarian Development Act reads as follows: -

Every registered farmers organisation shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession

and a common seal and may sue and be sued in its corporate name.

Since the Parakum farmer organisation was registered, it can be sued. Then as the main

complainant was the Parakum farmer Organisation, the Appellant should have named the

Page 5 of 5

organisation as a party. In Rawaya Publishers and Others Vs. Wijedasa Rajapakshe and Others1

held that;

In the content of writ applications, a necessary party is one without whom no order can be

effectively made . The Petitioner cannot be permitted to proceed with an application keeping the

original complainant out of the proceedings.

In the present case, Parakum Farmer Organisation was the main complainant who went before the

Agrarian Development officers. [P1] indicates that the complaint was made by Upali Darmasena

and others of the Parakum Farmer Organisation.

For reasons discussed above, I dismiss the appeal of the Appellant subject to a cost of Twenty

Thousand Rupees.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

PRESANTHA DE SILVA, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

1 (2001) 3 SLR 216