" . ,

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal against

judgment of Provincial High Court

exercising its revisionary jurisdiction.

C A (PHC) / 70 / 2012

High Court of Kegalle

Case No. 4249 / Rev

Magistrate's Court Ruwanwella

Case No. 17206

Udapola Dasanayakalage Reginold

Dasanayaka

Sumanasiri Building,

Dehiowita Road,

2

Deraniyagala,

PETITIONER - PETITIONER -

APPELLANT

-Vs-

1. Anhettigama Gamaralalage

Dharmawardhana

'Latha Sevana'

Anhettigama,

Deraniyagala.

2. Hingurahena Gamaralalage Amila

Wasantha Wijesiri,

Dodawaththa,

Nooriya.

RESPONDENT - RESPONDENT

- RESPONDENTS

3

Before: K K Wickremasinghe J

P. Padman Surasena J

Counsel; H Ahamed with Sarasi Hishshanka for the Petitioner - Petitioner

-Appellant

Gamini Senanayake for the 1st Respondent -Respondent -

Respondent.

Decided on: 2017 - 09 - 06

JUDGMENT

P Padman Surasena J

Learned counsel for all the Parties when this case came up on 2017-06-27

before us, agreed to have this case disposed by way of written

submissions. They agreed that this Court could pronounce the judgment

4

after considering the written submissions they had filed. Therefore, this

judgment would be based on the material that have been adduced by

parties in their pleadings and the contents of the written submissions filed

by them.

The Petitioner - Petitioner - Appellant (hereinafter sometimes referred to

as the Appellant) had filed an information in the Magistrate's Court of

Kegalle under section 66 (1) (b) as a private application.

Learned Primary Court Judge having inquired into this complaint, by his

order dated 2011-10-18, had held that the Appellant had failed to prove to

the satisfaction of Court that he had been dispossessed from the building,

which is the subject matter of the dispute.

Being aggrieved by the said order made by the learned Magistrate, the

Appellant had made a revision application to the Provincial High Court of

Sabaragamuwa Province holden at Kegalle urging the Provincial High Court

to revise the order made by the learned Magistrate.

5

Perusal of the journal entries of the Provincial High Court record shows;

i. that the said revision application was first supported in the High

Court on 2011-11-15,

ii. that the learned High Court Judge on that date had issued notices on

the respondents returnable on 2012-01-31,

It is not clear in the hand written minute dated 2012-01-31 as to what the

learned High Court Judge had done on 2012-01-31. There. is no

corresponding typed proceeding inserted in the record either. Thus, this

Court or for that matter anybody else cannot ascertain what transpired in

Court on that date. However the entry" 12.6.12 " appears to be the next

date fixed on that date. The fact that it is the next date is confirmed by the

fact that there is indeed a journal entry dated 2012-06-12.

On 2012-06-12, it appears that the case had come up as a calling case for

objections to be filed. Although the hand written minute of the learned

High Court Judge is not clear to understand what had happened on that

date, the typed proceeding of that date shows that the Appellant had been

6

present in Court without an Attorney at law and that the learned High

Court Judge had dismissed the case. There appear to be no reason for the

said order of dismissal made by the learned Provincial High Court Judge.

This is so because the fact that the Appellant had not been represented by

an Attorney at law cannot be a justification in the present circumstances

for such an order. There is no record that even the learned counsel for the

Respondent had moved for a dismissal of the case. In any case it was a

date given for the Respondent to file objections and nevertheless the

Appellant had been present in person in court. Therefore, there was no

real necessity for the Court to dismiss this case as it could still be

proceeded with, in one of the following ways;

i. by making a suitable order on any application by the Respondent

regarding filing objections,

ii. by fixing it for argument if the stage of filing objections is complete,

Thus, in the absence of any reason as to why it became necessary for the

learned Provincial High Court Judge to dismiss this case, this Court is of the

opinion that such an order is not justifiable.

7

Therefore, we decide to set aside the order of dismissal made by the

learned High Court Judge on 2012-06-12 and remit the case back to the

Provincial High Court directing the learned Provincial High Court Judge to

proceed with the case.

Appeal is allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K K Wickremasinghe J

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL