,

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

CA (Writ) Application No: 102/2017

In the matter of an Application in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka for a Mandate in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari

Splendour Media (Pvt.) Limited,

No. 06, Alwis Terrace, Colombo 3.

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. The Commissioner General of Labour.

2. C. G. H. Sanathlanka, Assistant Commissioner of Labour, Colombo East.

3. M.D Nalaka Wishwa Kumara, 382, "Nelum", Batagama South, Kandana.

4. K. A. P. Navaratne, Labour Officer, Colombo East.

5. N. R. Ranawaka, Assistant Commissioner of Labour, Colombo East.

1st, 2nd, 4 th and 5th Respondents at Labour Secretariat, Narahenpita, Colombo S.

RESPONDENTS

1

f

Before:

Counsel:

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

Ms. Manoli Jinadasa for the Petitioner

Susantha Balapatabendi, P.C, Additional Solicitor

General for the 15t, 2nd, 4th and 5th Respondents

Written Submissions: Tendered on behalf of the Petitioner on 9th January

2019 and 2nd July 2019

Decided on:

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

Tendered on behalf of the 1st, 2nd, 4th and 5th

Respondents on 11th June 2019

015t November 2019

When this application was taken up for argument on th June 2019, the learned

Counsel for the parties informed Court that written submissions have been

filed and moved that this Court pronounce judgment on the said written

submissions as well as the reply written submissions that would be tendered

on behalf of the Petitioner.

The Petitioner has filed this application, seeking inter alia a Writ of Certiorari to

quash the decision of the 15t Respondent, Commissioner General of Labour,

reflected in the letters annexed to the petition marked 'P6', 'PS' and 'Pll' by

which the Petitioner was directed to pay a sum of Rs. 589,400 being the sum of

money that the Petitioner ought to have contributed to the Employees

Provident Fund (EPF) in respect of certain allowances that had been paid by

the Petitioner to the 3'd Respondent.

2

(

r

The facts of this matter very briefly are as follows.

The Petitioner had initially employed the 3rd Respondent as an Assistant

Creative Director on the 8th September 2008. Having served the Petitioner for a

period of little over four years, the 3rd Respondent had resigned from the

Petitioner Company on 30th November 2012. The 3rd Respondent had

subsequently rejoined the Petitioner as Creative Director on 3rd November

2014 but had been dismissed from service by the Petitioner on 10th June 2015.

Bya petition dated 16th June 2015 annexed to the petition marked 'P2', the 3rd

Respondent had complained to the 1st Respondent that the Petitioner has

wrongfully terminated his services and had stated inter alia as follows:

" EXIlCoSrnOtllOt 2015 ~Sl 10 ~ ~Q) sa @c:))oStll e)Q) ~ qc:>)(;)lOsfXJ =

ergtl\rn =rn 0@Cl 0(l5 ~~ ere)Cle\l tIlO!!lJ @t@ erlllO ~ ~

~tQ)DoS J 00al tl&rot OOG5~ =l0E) ~ e)~oSrnOtllOtC) ~O~ ~

~ml@ tIlO ertrn errnO ~(.') ~ 0l:~@@C) oa~J6)Q ~.

0 Ol:~@@ ~ EXIlCoSrnOtllOt J GlC) @ er60CllW1:D ~mE) (EPF) 8C5e)J

evlOCDlO ero@~@ (ETF). e))el~Oll$CD ~Q)J (Gratuity), QClJ~ ~Q)J (Bonus) = ~

0~@e:l eroo ~JC:l ~ (interest) 8\S ~ ~mE)C) ~ tIlO ~~. ~

00 =JO Sel ~evJ ~ CDJ@ ~l@ 2CDC) ff(.')oS E>tQe5 ~~ oX:))QO

00e0S 2~ X = Xl ~ Stll~ tIlO ~(.')C) er@!lnJ ettOl."

This Court must observe that the above complaint relating to the non-payment

of the contribution to the EPF was general in nature.

3

By a letter dated 13th July 2015, annexed to the petition marked 'P3', the

Department of Labour had requested the Petitioner to present itself before the

4th Respondent for an inquiry relating to the complaint of the 3rd Respondent.

The said inquiry had subsequently been held only on 26th August 2015,

According to the Petitioner, at the said inquiry, the 4th Respondent had

informed the 3rd Respondent that he is not entitled to gratuity as the 3rd

Respondent had not served a continuous period of five years, The Petitioner

states further that, 'the 4 th Respondent also perused the payment records of

the 3rd Respondent and informed the Company that they were satisfied that

EPF and ETF has been correctly and properly calculated and settled by the

Petitioner.'l The Petitioner had sent a letter to the 4 th Respondent on 26th

August 2015 itself, annexed to the petition marked 'PS', confirming the above

understanding of the Petitioner that the 4 th Respondent was 'satisfied with the

EPF and ETF payments made by the company' , The Respondents have

produced the minutes of the inquiry proceedings relating to 26th August 2015

maintained by the 4 th Respondent, marked 'Al', which refers to the discussion

that was had with regard to the payment of EPF in the following manner:

"0(3C1JilrJf.l) o<wBl<::) Gial @@ ~ @E)0l 41089A em f:)J& ffot:1l 25 Qeil 83

c.x:>@eD @CI)E) fftBl EPF ~ ~K@ &S0l0<::)~ ~) ClJeD ffOlO ~ ff~ 0lJ@G!

Gi~() ~tO 00 fftBl (fflC-'Olal<::) @E)Blal) EPF ~lC-'&D l~@ &tO~ ~ Ol:~t ~ ec." eDE)~ 2015/02 - ~ ~~) &D)@al ~15l) o @@IDe!XK6 @OlJO~Ot ClC)e)al

e) @alJtBl ~~al O @~ @eiJ ootD=ill ~al@c,; ~ (E)JdOl) l~a005 ooeI!

=JC) tS\a() @~ ~ ~ @e),"

While it is admitted by both parties that the inquiry was to be proceeded with

on 9th September 2015 with regard to the issue of whether the termination of

1 See paragraph 10 of the petit ion.

4

{

the services of the 3'd Respondent was justified, neither the Petitioner nor the

Respondents have disclosed to this Court if the further inquiry did take place

on 9th September 2015 or as to what transpired thereafter. Be that as it may,

the 4th Respondent did not respond to 'PS', even though 'PS' had been

personally delivered to the 4 th Respondent. Thus, on the face of 'Ai' and 'PS', it

appears that the complaint of the 3rd Respondent with regard to non-payment

of EPF had come to an end on 26th August 2015.

The Petitioner states that by a letter dated 20

th September 2016, annexed to

the petition marked 'P6', the 2

nd Respondent, with whom the Petitioner has

not had any previous communication on the complaint of the 3rd Respondent,

had informed the Petitioner as follows:

"~ 00 Qo(;lG,lJC:)1lI 1958 (fotll 15 ~aell ~~ (f6()QJ{;)tlJ ~~@ oe!l8tD 10

Elrel ElaJd6X.:l = OeIl@rn 16 Elre> ElaJd6X.:l (f~ {j)Q)@cs5 ElzllOJO (f~/~

@~ tllS ~ ~El8! ~~1lI o(3~ ~ l~~~JO ~@ (1!(5)EJ)

@eIl)@)tl ~ (felllEl6m:l el (ftlll. (j)Q) el&D (frn~ 0lQl) ~ tll6 ~(3005 tll6

(ftl 'S' Elj(j()/ '~ ' Elj(j() ~eIl tll6 @COOl ~ 00 ~ ~@ C!iJ) erG)e;>J6co

0C!iJ1lI ~C!iJcl o(3~ mrm= tll6 (ftlll.

1. @e\))@~ tll)@ o(3El@~'" - 2008/09 - 2015/06

2. l~ 00 t;)Cltll l~@ - at 394,000.00

3. etWC!iJJ6co - a t 195,400.00 ~ - at 589,400.00"

The following breakdown of the said sum of Rs. 589,400 is set out in the

attachment to 'P6':

5

{

Period Total earnings on which EPF Total contribution Surcharge

has been calculated (20%)

2008/09 2 306,000 153,000 -1,530,000

2002/11

2014/11 -. 440,0003 88,000 42400

2015/06

The Petitioner had replied 'P6' by letter dated 6th October 2016, annexed to

the petition marked 'P7' and taken up the position that they have already

made EPF contributions on the salary that was paid to the 3rd Respondent. The

Petitioner had attached to its reply, a summary of the payments made on

account of the EPF contributions of the 3rd Respondent. This Court has

examined the said attachment and observes that payments have been made

on the due date specified in Section 15 of the EPF Act.

By 'P7', the Petitioner had also informed that the 3

rd Respondent was in receipt

of the following sums of money in addition to the salary, as evidenced by the

salary slips for the months of March - May, 2015:

./ Reimbursement of expenses - Rs. 55,000 (maximum limit)

./ Travelling allowance - Rs. 60,000

./ Promotional Expense reimbursement - Rs. 60,000 (maximum limit).

The Petitioner had taken up the position that it is not liable to contribute to

the EPF on the above allowances as none of the said allowances fall within the

definition of 'earnings' as defined by the Employee Provident Fund Act No. 15

2 Calculated at Rs. 30,000 per month.

3 Calculated at Rs. S5,000 per month.

6

of 1958, as amended.4 It does not appear that the Respondents have given any

consideration to the position of the Petitioner contained in 'P7', as the 2nd

Respondent had issued the Petitioner a notice dated 10th January 2017 in

terms of Section 38(2) of the Act, annexed to the petition marked 'P8',

informing the Petitioner that legal action will be instituted unless the said

monies are paid by 31st January 2017. Even though the Petitioner had

protested the issuance of the said notice by its letters dated 20th January 2017

and 20th February 2017,5 the 5th Respondent had informed the Petitioner by

letter dated 28th February 2017 annexed to the petition marked 'Pll' that legal

action would be instituted unless the sum of Rs. 589,400 is paid within 14 days.

Aggrieved by the decisions contained in 'P6', 'P8' and 'Pll' to pay a sum of Rs.

589,400/-, the Petitioner invoked the jurisdiction of this Court, seeking inter

alia a Writ of Certiorari to quash the said decision.

The learned Counsel for the Petitioner has sought to quash the said decision on

the following three grounds:

1) The 1S\ 2nd and 5th Respondents have acted contrary to the rules of

Natural justice.

4 'Earnings' is defined in Section 47 as follows: " 'Earnings' means - (a) wages, salary or fees; (b) cost of living allowance, special living allowance and other similar allowances; (c) payment in respect of holidays; (d) the cash value of any cooked or uncooked food provided by the employer to employees in prescribed employments and any such food commodity used in the preparation or composition of any food as is so provided, such value being assessed by the employer subject to an appeal to the Commissioner whose decision on such appeal shall be final; (e) meal allowance; and (f) such other forms of remuneration as may be prescribed."

5 The said letters have been annexed to the petition marked 'pg' and 'PlO' respectively.

7

2) The Petitioner has not been given a hearing as to why it is not liable to

contribute to the EPF on the said allowances, prior to being directed to

pay the said sum of money.

3) Allowances paid to the 3rd Respondent does not fall within the definition

of 'earnings' as defined in the Act and hence the said decision is

unreasonable and irrational as well as ultra vires the provisions of the Act.

The first two grounds urged by the learned Counsel for the Petitioner raise the

same issue and this Court is of the view that the said two grounds can be

considered together. Prior to re-visiting the facts of this application with regard

to the above grounds, it would be useful to consider the rationale for insisting

that a party should be heard prior to an order affecting the rights of that party

is made.

The importance of natural justice and why Courts insist upon it are captured by

the following paragraphs in 'Administrative Law' by Wade: 6

"Just as the courts can control the substance of what public authorities do

by means of the rules relating to reasonableness, improper purposes, and

so forth, so through the principles of natural justice they can control the

procedure by which they do it. In so doing they have imposed a particular

procedural technique on government departments and statutory

authorities generally. The courts have, in effect, devised a code of fair

administrative procedure based on doctrines which are an essential part

of any system of administrative justice.

'Administrative law' by H.W.R. Wade and C.F. Forsyth; 11th Edition; pages 373 and 374.

8

Procedure is not a matter of secondary importance. As governmental

powers continually grow more drastic, it is only by procedural fairness that

they are rendered tolerable. A judge of the United States Supreme Court

has said: 'Procedural fairness and regularity are of the indispensable

essence of liberty. Severe substantive laws can be endured if they are fairly

and impartially applied. ,7 One of his colleagues said: 'The history of liberty

has largely been the history of the observance of procedural safeguards. ,s

It is true that the rules of natural justice restrict the freedom of

administrative action and that their observance costs a certain amount of

time and money. But time and money are likely to be well spent if they

reduce friction in the machinery of government; and it is because they are

essentially rules for upholding fairness and so reducing grievances that the

rules of natural justice can be said to promote efficiency rather than

impede it. Provided that the courts do not let them run riot, and keep

them in touch with the standards which good administration demands in

any case, they should be regarded as a protection not only to citizens but

also to officials. Moreover, a decision which is made without bias, and

with proper consideration of the views of those affected by it, will not only

be more acceptable; it will also be of better quality. Justice and efficiency

go hand in hand, so long at least as the law does not impose excessive

refinements. "

7 Shaughnessy v. United States, 345 US 206 (1953) (Jackson J).

8 McNabb v. United States, 318 US 332 (1943) (Frankfurter J).

9

The nexus between the duty to act fairly and observance of the principles of

natural justice has been explained in Judicial Review of Administrative Action

by De Smith, in the following manner: 9

"That the donee of a power must "act fairly" is a long-settled principle

governing the exercise of discretion, though its meaning is inevitably

imprecise. Since 1967 the concept of a duty to act fairly has often been

used by judges to denote an implied procedural obligation. In general it

means a duty to observe the rudiments of natural justice for a limited

purpose in the exercise of functions that are not analytically judicial but

administrative. Given the flexibility of natural justice, it may not have been

strictly necessary to use the term "duty to act fairly" at all, but its usage is

now firmly established in the judicial vocabulary. Its value has lain in

assisting the extension of implied procedural obligations to the discharge

of functions that are not analytically judicial, and in emphasizing that

acting in accordance with natural justice does not mean forcing

administrative procedures into a straitjacket. Th!! comparatively recent

emergence of this use of the "duty to act fairly" may also enable the

courts to tackle constructively procedural issues that have not traditionally

been regarded as part of the requirements of natural justice."

Our Courts have consistently held that prior to a decision affecting the rights of

an individual are taken, such person must be afforded a right to respond.

' 4'" Edition; J.M. Evans; at pages 238- 239.

10

In Lalith Oeshapriya vs. Captain Weerakoon and Others, Marsoof, J/President

of the Court of Appeal (as he then was) held as follows:lO

"Even more serious is the violation of the two cardinal principles of natural

justice embodied in the maxims 'audi alteram partem' and 'nemo judex in

causa sua potest'. The first of these principles postulates a fair hearing

before the rights of a citizen are affected by a quasi judicial or

administrative decision. In this context, it is now recognised that 'qui

aliquid statuerit parte in audita altera acquum licet discerit, haud acquum

fecerit' - which means that he who determines any matter without

hearing both sides, though he may have decided right, has not done

justice. According to the jurisprudence built around the 'audi alteram

partem' principal, there should not only be a hearing of both sides, but the

hearing should be more than a pretence. The procedure followed should

be fair and conducive to the achievement of justice. In Board of Education

v Ricell Lord Loreburn, L. C. in his famo us dictum laid down that a tribunal

was under duty to "act in good faith, and fairly listen to bath sides for that

is a duty lying upon everyone who decides anything." In De Verteuil v

Knaqqs12 it was laid down as follows:

"In general, the requirements of natural justice are first, that the

person accused should know the nature of the accusation made;

secondly, that he should be given an opportunity to state his case;

and thirdly, that the tribunal should act in good faith .,,13

10 [2004] 2 Sri LR 314 at page 319.

11 1911 AC 179 at 182.

12 1918 AC 557 at 560.

13 Emphasis added.

11

As his Lordship Sharvananda, c.J. observed in Chulasubadra v The

University of Colombo and Others14, "the obligation to give the person

charged a fair chance to exculpate himself or fair opportunity to

controvert the charge may oblige the tribunal not only to inform that

person of the hearsay evidence, but also give the accused a sufficient

opportunity to deal with that evidence."

In Gamlathge Ranjith Gamlath vs Commissioner General of Excise and two

others/ 5 Sripavan J (as he then was) held as follows:

"It is one of the fundamental principles in the administration of justice that

an administrative body which is to decide must hear both sides and give

both an opportunity of hearing before a decision is taken. No man can

incur a loss of property by judicial or quasi-judicial proceedings unless and

until he has had a fair opportunity of answering the complaint made

against him. Thus, objectors at public inquiries must be given a fair

opportunity to meet adverse evidence, even though the statutory

provisions do not cover the case expressly. (Vide Errington and others v.

Minister of Health16). The court would certainly regard any decision as

having grave consequences if it affects proprietary rights. In Schmidt and

another v. Secretary of State for Home Affairs17 Lord Denning M. R.

suggested that the ambit of natural justice extended not merely to protect

rights but any legitimate expectation of which it would not be fair to

deprive a person without hearing what he has to say."

" [1986) 2 Sri LR 288 at 303.

15 CA (Writ) Application No. 1675/2002; CA Minutes of 28" March 2003; referred to in Ratnayake v Commissioner General of Excise and Others [2oo4J 1 Sri LR 115. 1. [1935J 1 KB 249.

17[1969J 2 Ch. 149 at 170.

12

The right of a party to be heard prior to a decision affecting his rights being

taken even where the Statute is silent on such a requirement, has been

confirmed in the following passage from the case of Lloyd v McMahon18:

"In particular, it is well-established that when a statute has conferred on

any body the power to make decisions affecting individuals, the courts will

not only require the procedure prescribed by the statute to be followed,

but will readily imply so much and no more to be introduced by way of

additional procedural safeguards as will ensure the attainment of

fairness."

The necessity for a party to be heard was considered by this Court in Kalu

Banda vs. Upali.19 Even though this judgment applied to an inquiry

contemplated under Section 110 of the Land Development Ordinance which

laid down a specific procedure to be followed prior to cancelling a permit, the

principle laid down would apply equally to the present application. In Kalu

Banda's case, the Counsel for the respondent argued that there was no

essential requirement to afford a hearing as the petitioner had violated one of

the conditions to the permit. This Court, disagreeing with this position, held as

follows:

"where provision is made by law in regard to the procedure to be followed

when cancelling a lease permit granted to a person, there is no reason

why such procedure should be ignored or overlooked. Such conduct would

18 [1987) AC 625 at 702; cited in 'Administrative Law' by Wade and Forsyth; 11'" Edition pages 423-424. " [1999) (3) Sri LR 391 at pages 399-400.

13

be illegal and arbitrary and offend the fair administrative procedure

expected from public authorities.

On the other hand, even if there was no provision made for a party to be

heard before his lease permit is cancelled, principles of natural justice will

supply the omission of the legislature. The reason being that the court will

not readily accept the position that the Parliament intended an

administrative authority to exercise a discretion vested in it by statute, in

such a manner so as to offend the principles of natural justice.

Further, it is worth referring here to the words of Byles, J. in the case of

Cooper v. Wandsworth Board of Workio where he stated that:

" ... a long course of decisions, beginning with Dr. Bentley's case, and

ending with some very recent cases, establish that, although there

are no positive words in a statute requiring that the party shall be

heard, yet the justice of the common law will supply the omission of

the legislature. "

The requirement to afford a hearing has been considered extensively by the

Supreme Court in Ranjith Flavian Wijeratne vs. Asoka Sarath Amarasinghe;

where Priyantha Jayewardena, J held as follows :21

"Principles of natural justice are applicoble to every tribunal or body of

persons vested with authority to adjudicate upon matters involving rights

of individuals. It is likewise applicable to the exercise of judicial powers

,0 (1863) 14 CB Reports (NS) 180.

21 SC (Appeal) No. 40/2013; SC Minutes 12'h November 2015.

14

too. Every judicial and quasi - judicial act is subject to the procedure

required by natural justice. The breach of anyone of the said rules would

violate the principles of natural justice. In the case of Ridge v. Baldwin

(1964) A.c. 40 Lord Denning held that a breach of the principles of natural

jUitice renders the decision voidable and not null and void ab initio.

An administrative official or tribunal exercising a quasi - judicial power is

bound to comply with the principles of natural justice. i.e. to comply with

the rules of audi altera partem and nemo judex in causa sua. A quasi-

judicial decision may involve finding of facts and it affects the rights of a

person. Sometimes such decisions involve matters of law and facts or even

purely matters of law.

In Russell v. Duke of Norfolk and Others (1949) 1 All E.R. 109 Tucker LJ.

observed that one essential requirement in regard to the exercise of

judicial and quasi - judicial powers is that the person concerned should

have a reasonable opportunity of presenting his case.

I am of the opinion that where the power is conferred in an administrative

body or tribunal which exercises power in making decisions which affect

the rights of persons, such body or tribunal should act according to the

principles of natural justice except in cases where such right is excluded,

either by express words or by necessary implication, by the legislature.

Lord Diplock in the case of O'Reillv and Others v. Mackman and Others

(1983) 2 AC 237 at 276 held that the right of a man to be given a fair

opportunity of hearing what is alleged against him and of presenting his

15

own case is so fundamental to any civilized legal system that it is to be

presumed that Porliament intended that a failure to observe it should

render null and void any decision reached in breach of this requirement.

A tribunal exercising quasI judicial functions is not bound to adopt a '

particular procedure in the absence of statutory provision. In some

situations the tribunals have to act within certain limits. However, it needs

to observe certain minimum standards of natural justice and fairness

when discharging its functions.

The need to follow the principles of natural justice is an accepted norm in

Sri Lankan courts and tribunals as well as in the world over for several

decades. I am of the opinion that the need to follow principles of natural

justice has now become part of the Sri Lankan law. 22 Hence, in the

absence of special provisions as to how the court or tribunal is to proceed,

the law requires that the principles of natural justice to be followed.

A tribunal must do its best to act justly and to reach just ends by just

means. It must give the parties notice of what was charged against them

and allow them to make representations in answer. A fair opportunity

should be given to a party to correct or contradict any relevant

statement made to his prejudice.23 The party against whom the charge is

made, after he has notice of the charges, is entitled to be heard.

Whether an oral hearing is necessary or desirable depends on the

relevant laws and rules or procedures which the inquiry is held, the

22 Emphasis added. " Emphasis added.

16

circumstances, the nature 0/ the right in/ringed, the occasion for the

exercise 0/ authority by the tribunal and the effect 0/ the decision on a

person/4

The question whether the requirements of natural justice have been met

by the procedure adopted in any given case depends to a greater extent

on the facts and circumstances of the case in point. Tucker L.J. held in the

case of Russell v. Duke of Norfolk and Others (1949) 1 All E.R. 109 'There

are no words which are of universal application to every kind of inquiry

and every kind of domestic tribunal. The requirements of natural justice

must depend on the circumstances of the case, the nature of the inquiry,

the rules under which the tribunal is acting, the subject matter that is

being dealt with, and so forth."

In the case of AG v. Ryan (1980) AC 718 Lord Diplock held that the Minister

was a person having legal authority to determine a question affecting the

rights of individuals. This being so it is a necessary implication that he is

required to observe the principles of natural justice when exercising that

authority; and if he fails to do so, his purported decision is a nUllity."

As observed earlier, some laws contain provisions that specifically require a

hearing to be given while some laws may go a step further and specify the

procedure that should be followed in affording a hearing. There are many laws

that are completely silent with regard to the requirement for a hearing. The

EPF Act is one such law. Except for the requirement in Section 28 of the EPF

Act that, "all claims to benefits shall be determined by the Commissioner or any

" Emphasis added.

17

officer authorised in that behalf by him ... ", the EPF Act is silent as to the kind of

hearing that should be afforded to an employer, before determining whether

an em ployer has failed to comply with the statutory obligation laid down in

Section 10 of the EPF Act to remit the contributions of the employer as well as

the employee, to the EPF.

Applying the aforementioned judicial dicta, it is the view of this Court that

whenever a complaint is received that an employer has not complied with its

obligations contained in the EPF Act, the Department of Labour must:

(a) inform the employer of the nature of the complaint of non-compliance

made against it, and where available, make available copies of the

complaint to the employer;

(b) afford the employer an opportunity to respond and clarify matters

relating to such complaint;

(c) afford the employee an opportunity of responding to the position of the

employer.

This Court is of the view that the above process would enable the Officers of

the Department of Labour to arrive at a decision which is reasonable by both

parties. This Court must state that the form of the hearing - i.e. whether it

should be an oral hearing; whether the parties should have the right to cross

examine the other party; whether it should be on documents and/or on

written submissions; or whether it should be a combination of the above - is

18

best left to be decided by the relevant Officer of the Department of Labour,

taking into consideration the particular circumstances of each complaint.

Bearing in mind the above dicta, this Court will now consider what transpired

in this application. Pursuant to the complaint of the 3'd Respondent marked

'P2', the 4th Respondent directed the Petitioner to be present for an inquiry,

which is an admission by the Department of Labour that it cannot take a

decision on the said complaint without affording the Petitioner a hearing. The

Petitioner did present itself before the 4 th Respondent on 26th August 2015. A

discussion on the complaint took place that day between the 4th Respondent,

Petitioner and the 3'd Respondent. This Court is of the view that given the

general nature of the complaint made by the 3'd Respondent in 'P2' [Le. l CSX)

5\ erdOCl~ @~ (EPF) ~ 05~ 1!(5)elc:> ~ 00 @eiJ~L what was

required was to ascertain if contributions had been made to the EPF on behalf

of the 3'd Respondent, and to that extent, the said discussion was sufficient to

satisfy compliance with the rules of natural justice. In these circumstances, this

Court would not insist on a more formal inquiry, as the issue involved was

whether the contributions had been made or not. As observed earlier, the

position of the Petitioner that the 3'd Respondent accepted that the EPF

contributions have been made on time is confirmed by the minutes of the

discussion maintained by the 4th Respondent, marked 'AI'. It is therefore clear

to this Court that (a) the discussion on 26th August 2015 revolved only on

whether the Petitioner had complied with its obligation to contribute to the

EPF on behalf of the 3'd Respondent; (b) the said discussion did not revolve

around the non-payment of EPF on certain allowances that the Petitioner had

paid the 3'd Respondent, and (c) the discussion on the complaint of the 3'd

Respondent relating to EPF ended on 26th August 2015.

19

..

In other words, it is the view of this Court that even though a discussion took

place on 26th August 2015, the 4th Respondent did not afford the Petitioner a

hearing with regard to the specific issue of whether the Petitioner is liable to

contribute to the EPF on the allowances paid to the 3rd Respondent, which is

the basis on which the Department of Labour subsequently imposed liability on

the Petitioner by 'P6', 'pg' and 'Pll'. This conclusion is supported by paragraph

43 of the written submissions tendered on behalf of the Respondents, where it

has been submitted that, 'Even if the inquiry was held accordingly, the 4th

Respondent has only determined in his inquiry that EPF was duly paid on the

basic salary as given in the petition and not that the EPF was calculated for the

correct aggregate amount. The 4th Respondent did not determine whether the

allowances paid should come within the meaning 0/ 'earnings' and whether it

is subject to EPF.' (emphasis added). In paragraph 44 of the said submissions, it

has been submitted further that, "the determination does not in any way

whatsoever refer to the inclusion of additional allowances for EPF". If a hearing

was not afforded to the Petitioner with regard to its liability to contribute to

the EPF on the allowances paid to the 3rd Respondent, that would then be a

violation of the principles of natural justice.

However, in response to the averments contained in paragraph 6 of the

petition, which deals with the inquiry held before the 4th Respondent on 26th

August 2015, the Respondents have stated in paragraph 6 of the said

Statement of Objections that, "at the inquiry it was revealed that EPF on

promotional allowances had not been paid to the 3,d Respondent. Accordingly,

Rupees 30,000/- monthly for the period September 2008 to November 2012

and Rupees 60,000 monthly for the period November 2014 to June 2015 (has

20

been paid). To support this stance, the 3rd Respondent has submitted the

relevant salary sheets."

Is the above averment, which is supported by an affidavit of the Commissioner

General of Labour, an honest and truthful declaration of what transpired at the

inquiry that was held on 26th August 2015 before the 4th Respondent? This

Court does not think so for three reasons.

The first is that there is no supporting affidavit from the 4 th Respondent.

The second is that if such a discussion did take place and if the 3rd Respondent

did submit the relevant salary sheets, why is it that the minutes of the said

discussion maintained by the 4 th Respondent marked 'AI' not reflect that fact?

It must be stated that other than what has been re-produced earlier in this

judgment, the said minutes of the discussion held on 26th August 2015 do not

contain any other discussion on the payment of EPF, including on the liability

to contribute to the EPF on allowances.

The final reason why the averments in paragraph 6 are not true arises from the

quantum of the allowance. The Respondents state that the promotional

allowance paid for the period September 2008 - November 2012 is Rs. 30,000.

The Petitioner however submits that for the months of September 2008 -

March 2009, the 3rd Respondent was only paid his basic salary. This is borne

out by the salary slips for the respective months, annexed to the petition

marked 'P13a' - 'P13g' . If this be so, the statement that Rs. 30,000 was paid

from September 2008 is incorrect. Furthermore, only a sum of Rs. 25,000 has

been paid as promotional allowance for the months of April - June 2009, as

21

borne out by the salary slips for the respective months, annexed to the petition

marked 'P13h' - 'P13i'. This too means that t he averment in paragraph 6 is

incorrect, and that the discussion that the Respondents claim took place on

26

th August 2015 did not actually take place.

The Petitioner admits that during the second stint of his employment, the 3rd

Respondent was paid a reimbursement allowance of Rs. 55,000 and a

promotional allowance of Rs. 60,000. From the above averment of the

Respondents, it is clear that the Petitioner has been directed to pay EPF on the

promotional allowance of Rs. 60,000. However, when one considers the

attachment to 'P6' which gives the breakdown of t he sums due, it is apparent

that the Respondents have calculated t he EPF on an allowance of Rs. 55,000,

which then means t hat 'P6' does not relate to the promotional allowance but

to the reimbursement allowance of Rs. 55,000.

In fact, in paragraph 18 of the Statement of Objections, the Respondents state

that, 'the insertion of reimbursable allowances in every solary slip of the 3rd

Respondent shows the intention of the Petitioner to recognise such payment as

earnings of the 3

rd Petitioner.' However, in t he very next paragraph, the

Respondents state that, 'the promotional allowance paid to the 3rd

Respondent amounts to a fixed (recurring) allowance and should be considered

as earnings in calculation of the EPF.'

Thus, it appears to this Court that there is confusion even in the minds of the

Respondents with regard to the allowance that attracts the payment of EPF.

The end result is that the averment that it 'was revealed (at the inquiry) that

EPF on promotional allowances had not been paid' is incorrect.

22

For the above reasons, this Court rejects the explanation of the Respondents

that the Department of Labour offered the Petitioner an opportunity on 26th

August 2015 of presenting its side of the story as to why it is not liable for the

payment of EPF on the allowances paid to the 3rd Respondent.

Other than for the above 'hearing', the Respondents have not taken up the

position in their Statement of Objections that it afforded the Petitioner an

opportunity of satisfying the Officers of the Department of Labour that it was

not liable for the payment of any further sums of money as EPF contributions.

It is in the above background that this Court has to consider the letter dated

20th September 2016 marked 'PG' sent by the 2nd Respondent, by which the

Petitioner was directed by the 2nd Respondent to pay a sum of Rs. 589,400. The

simple argument of the learned Counsel for the Petitioner is that the

discussion on EPF ended on 26th August 2015 and that the Petitioner was

thereafter not afforded any hearing or an opportunity of satisfying the Officers

of the Department of Labour that it is not liable to pay EPF on any of the

allowances that it has made to the 3rd Respondent. In other words, the

complaint of the Petitioner that its views were not sought prior to 'PG' being

issued has not been contradicted by the Respondents, and in these

circumstances, this Court is satisfied that the Petitioner was not afforded an

opportunity of explaining why it is not liable to contribute to the EPF for the

allowances paid to the 3rd Respondent, prior to 'PG' being issued.

This Court reiterates its view that while the nature of the hearing can be left to

the discretion of the administrative body, it is fundamental that an Inquiry

Officer follow the principles of natural justice and affords both parties a proper

23

hearing, including an opportunity to the employer to present his side of the

story. It must however be emphasised that in ensuring procedural fairness and

the adherence with the principles of natural justice, Courts will not impose

requirements that make it impossible for administrative bodies to arrive at

decisions in an expeditious manner or impose unnecessary shackles on their

ability to take decisions. That being said, this Court is of the view that a

conclusion reached in violation of the fundamental principles of natural justice

should not be allowed to stand and for that reason, the deci$ion of the 2nd

Respondent, contained in 'P6', is liable to be quashed by a Writ of Certiorari.

As the directions in 'P8' and 'PH' are a follow up of 'P6', this Court is of the

view that 'P8' and 'Pll' are also liable to be quashed by a Writ of Certiorari.

In the above circumstances, this Court is of the view that the necessity for this

Court to consider whether the said allowances comes within the definition of

'earnings' in the EPF Act does not arise. However, this Court must state that

even if one accepts the position of the Respondents that it afforded the

Petitioner a hearing, the Department of Labour has not informed the

Petitioner the reasons for its decision that contributions must be made to the

EPF on the allowances paid to the 3'd Respondent nor have any reasons been

set out in the Statement of Objections. Hence, the decision in 'P6' is liable to

be quashed due to the failure by the Respondents to give reasons for its

decision.

It is perhaps appropriate at this stage to quote the following passage from the

judgment of the Supreme Court in Karunadasa vs Unique Gem Stones limited

and others25 :

25 (1997) 1 Sri L.R. 256 at page 263.

24

..

"To say that Natural Justice entitles a party to a hearing does not mean

merely that his evidence and submissions must be heard and recorded; it

necessarily means that he is entitled to a reasoned consideration of the

case which he presents."

This Court must state that neither party has explained the nature of the said

allowances, and in the absence of reasons for the decision in 'P6', this Court

could not have in any event arrived at any finding with regard to the liability of

the Petitioner to contribute to the EPF on the allowances.

Accordingly, this Court issues a Writ of Certiorari as prayed for in paragraph (b)

of the prayer to the petition quashing the decisions contained in 'P6', 'PS' and

'Pll'. The 1st Respondent and the Officers of the Department of Labour may

conduct a fresh inquiry into the complaint of the 3'd Respondent, and having

afforded the Petitioner an opportunity of presenting its explanation as to why

the Petitioner is not liable to contribute EPF on the allowances paid to the 3'd

Respondent and/or contradicting the position of the 3'd Respondent, arrive at

an appropriate decision.

This Court makes no order with regard to costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

25