==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL

OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. (Writ) Application

No: 0580 / 2024

In the matter of an application for mandate in the

nature of Writ of Certiorari under and in terms of

Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Refinitiv Limited (Formerly Reuters Limited)

5 Canada Square,

London E14 5AQ,

United Kingdom.

And

Refinitiv Limited (Formerly Reuters Limited)

Level 08, East Tower,

World Trade Centre,

Echelon Square,

Colombo 01,

(the branch registered under Part XVIII

of the Companies Act No. 7 of 2007 – registration

No. CIA 389)

And now

Refinitiv Limited (Formerly Reuters Limited)

London Stock Exchange Group,

Trace Expert City,

Colombo 10,

Sri Lanka.

PETITIONER

Vs

2

1. Hon. Manusha Nanayakkara

1A. Hon. Dr. Harini Amarasuriya

1B. Hon. Anil Jayantha Fernando

Minister of Labour,

Ministry of Labour,

6th Floor, Mehewara Piyasa,

Narahenpita,

Colombo 05.

2. B.K. Prabhath Chandrakeerthi

2A. H.K.A. Jayasundara

2B. H.M.D.N.K. Wataliyadda,

Commissioner General of Labour,

Labour Secretariat,

No 41, Kirula Road,

Colombo 05.

3. P.K.D.H. Munasinghe

3A. G.C.P. Kumara

Assistant Commissioner of Labour

(Colombo South)

Colombo South District Labour Office,

6th floor,

No 56, Kirula Road,

Narahenpita,

Colombo 05.

4. C.S.P. Peiris

Labour Officer,

Colombo South District Labour Office,

6th floor

No 56, Kirula Road,

Narahenpita,

Colombo 05.

3

Before : Dhammika Ganepola, J. Adithya Patabendige, J.

Counsel : Amrit Rajapaksha with Saumya Wickramisnghe instructed by John

Wilson Partners for the Petitioner. Swasthika Arulingam for the 5th Respondent. Ishara Madarasinghe, SC for the 1st to 4th Respondents.

Argued on : 30.09.2025.

Written Submission

Tendered on : 30.10.2025 for the Petitioner.

: 31.10.2025 for the 5th Respondent

Decided on : 02.12.2025.

Adithya Patabendige, J.

The Petitioner, Refinitiv Limited (previously known as Reuters Limited) has moved this

Court seeking among other reliefs, a writ of certiorari to invalidate the determinations said to be

embodied in the communications marked A 9 and A 10.

5. B. A. Ranga Sirilal

19/2 A, 1st Lane,

Wickramasinghe Pura,

Battaramulla.

RESPONDENTS

4

According to the documents marked A1 and A2, the Petitioner company is registered in the

United Kingdom and Sri Lanka and its previous name was Reuters Limited but changed the

name as Refinitiv Limited. The Petitioner further stated that the Reuters News & Media

Limited is an associated and/or subsidiary company of the Petitioner company.

A summary of the facts relevant to the present application, as described by the parties, is as

follows.

The 5th Respondent, lodged a written complaint marked A3 with the Colombo South District

Labour Office against the Reuters News & Media Limited complaining of non-payment of EPF

and Gratuity. The 4th Respondent conducted the inquiry on the above complaint on 12/03/2021

and all parties had agreed to dispose the inquiry by way of written submissions. The 5th

Respondent had filed his written submissions along with documents marked P 1 to P14 by way

of an affidavit marked A5. However, the Petitioner states that the said documents submitted by

the 5th respondent had been misplaced. The written submissions of the Petitioner dated

13/05/2021 marked A6.

According to the paragraph 14 of the petition dated 11/09/2024, the position of the Petitioner

before the 4th Respondent is as follows.

(i.) The Commissioner of Labour does not have jurisdiction to make a determination with

regard to ETF and hence the submissions are confined to the questions of EPF and

Gratuity;

(ii.) The complainant (5th Respondent) was an employee (on a contract of service) under

the Petitioner only for 3 months from May 2018 to July 2018 and thereafter under

Reuters News & Media Ltd for 16 months from 01.08.2018 to 29.11.2018;

(iii.) The employment of the 5th Respondent was terminated by mutual consent on

29.11.2018;

(iv.) Both Companies have duly and properly paid all EPF contributions for the entire

period of the 5th Respondent’s employment as an employee;

5

(v.) Neither the Petitioner nor Reuters News & Media Ltd employed 15 or more workmen

on any day in the 12 months preceding the cessation of the 5th Respondent’s

employment;

(vi.) Prior to May 2018, the 5th Respondent was employed by the Petitioner on a series of

contracts for services (as an independent contractor), where he provided services to

the Petitioner as a freelance text journalist.

The 3rd Respondent, Assistant Commissioner of Labour (Colombo South), issued a written

direction requiring the payment of a sum of Rs. 6,217,146 as arrears of EPF and surcharges

thereof marked A9 and A10. The Petitioner, in the instant Application in paragraph 17, states that

the said direction is bad in law, irrational, unfair, unreasonable and/or arbitrary for the following

reasons.

(a) No reasons are given for the said decisions, which amounts to a violation of natural

justice;

(b) The 3rd Respondent has failed to consider that the original complaint made by the 5th

Respondent was against Reuters News & Media Ltd and not the Petitioner. Therefore, the

scope of the inquiry was confined to the question of whether Reuters News & Media Ltd

was in default of paying EPF contributions. In the circumstances, the 3rd Respondent

exceeded his jurisdiction by making an order and/or finding against the Petitioner;

(c) The 3rd Respondent has not considered the submission adduced on behalf of the

Petitioner that the 5th Respondent was only an independent contractor (freelance

journalist) during the relevant time and/or has provided no reason for rejecting that

submission;

(d) The decisions of the 3rd Respondent are based on irrelevant matters;

(e) The decisions of the 3rd Respondent are not based on any evidence and/or no evidence

was adduced by the 5th Respondent to support the said decisions.

6

According to the document marked A9 and A10, the 4th Respondent has directed the Petitioner

only to pay arrears of EPF and applicable surcharges. In these circumstances, I am of the view

that the issue relating to the non-payment of Gratuity need not be addressed.

At the hearing of the application, the learned Counsel for the Petitioner submitted that the 5th

Respondent in his complaint marked A3 sought the relief from Reuters News & Media Limited

and not against the Petitioner. The position of the Petitioner is that the Petitioner company and

Reuters News & Media Limited are two different legal entities.

The Petitioner has admitted that Reuters News and Media Limited is an associated and/or

subsidiary Company within the same corporate group. As per the written submission filed before

the 4th Respondent marked A6, the Petitioner has further stated in paragraph 2 that the Petitioner

and 5th Respondent entered into a contract of employment on 1st May 2018 and the employment

of the 5th Respondent was transferred to Reuters News and Media Limited with effect from 1st

August 2018.

It is also not in dispute that the 5th Respondent was engaged under annual contracts with the

Petitioner from 2005 until May 2018. The position of the Petitioner is that the 5th Respondent

served as a freelance Journalist during this period and was not as an employee. However, the 5th

Respondent produced several documents with his objections dated 9th March 2025 and the

documents marked R5 and R6 clearly demonstrate that Reuters Limited and Reuters News and

Media Limited operate within the same corporate group. Document R6 corroborates that the 5th

Respondent was transferred from one entity to another and it is significant R6 was signed by

Keith Wilson on behalf of Reuters Limited while the affidavit marked A8 was sworn and given

by the same person on behalf of Reuters News and Media Limited.

In view of this material, it is evident that the transfer of the 5th Respondent between two entities

of the same group did not interrupt the continuity of his employment. A mere internal transfer

within a corporate group cannot be relied upon to suggest that the employment relationship was

discontinued.

Next, I turn to the question of the nature of the relationship between the Petitioner and the 5th

Respondent, namely whether it constituted a contract of employment or merely a contract for

employment.

7

In determining whether an individual is a freelancer or an employee, the Court is required to

examine the substance of the relationship, not the labels used by the employer. It is abundantly

clear that the Petitioner failed to submit any of the annual contracts signed by the parties to the

instant application whereas the 5th Respondent has produced the written contract marked R1

along with his objection.

The material before this Court demonstrate that the 5th Respondent had been working for the

Petitioner under annually renewed agreements from 2005 until 2018. Such long term,

uninterrupted service is inconsistent with freelance work which is ordinarily ad hoc, assignment

based and non-exclusive. A worker who remains attached to the same organization for more than

a decade, on annual renewals indicates the regular nature of the work of the 5th Respondent.

Upon perusal of the R1, it appears that, the 5th Respondent was given company equipment, press

cards, and password access to internal systems and was to follow internal editorial,

communication, security and data protection policies. These are classic indicators of employer

control and organizational integration into the Petitioner Company. Freelancers do not normally

receive access to the internal system, hardware and also need not to follow company codes and

procedures.

On the other hand, the Petitioner imposed restrictions on the 5th Respondent’s outside work,

requiring him to disclose and obtain approval for other engagements and ensuring that such work

did not conflict with his duties to the Petitioner. Such restraints on economic freedom are clear

indication of an employer - employee relationship and not of a contract for service.

Clause 7.7 of the R1 is of particular significance and provides as follows:

“Confidentiality

As part of your relationship with Reauters, you may come to know confidential information about

Reauters, our dealings with other companies, or financial information about the stock market

(confidential information). You will use that Confidential Information only for the purpose of

carrying out your assignment and will otherwise hold that information in strictest confidence.

This obligation of confidentiality shall survive termination of this agreement for any reason

whatsoever.”

8

This confidentiality clause clearly indicates the level of trust and access normally afforded to

employees. The sharing of internal financial information, corporate dealings, and sensitive

editorial material is characteristic of an employee who engaged in organizational functions.

The transfer of the 5th Respondent between two entities within the same corporate group does not

deny the character of employment of the 5th Respondent. Internal transfers are common in group

structures and it does not convert an employee into a freelancer. Documents R5 and R6 confirm

that both entities are part of the same economic unit and that the transfer of a worker as an intra –

group arrangement only.

Having considered all the relevant features, including the continuity of service, organizational

control, integration into the system of the Company, the restrictions imposed on outside work,

the confidentiality obligations, and the internal transfer within same group of Companies, it is

abundantly clear that the 5th Respondent functioned as an employee. The overall effect of these

elements nullifies the contention of the Petitioner that the 5th Respondent served merely as a

freelance journalist.

A perusal of 1R1 makes it abundantly clear that the 4th Respondent came to the conclusion after

taking into account the aforesaid factors.

In paragraph 17 of the Petition, it is alleged that no reasons were given for the said decision by

the 3rd Respondent. On the other hand, the Petitioner has attempted to present documents marked

A9 and A10 as if they constitute the decisions or directions impugned in these proceedings.

However, it is evident that these documents are merely issued under Section 10 of the EPF Act

by the 3rd Respondent based on the decision of the inquiring officer, the 4th Respondent and they

do not represent the final determination of the 4th Respondent. The document marked 1R1, by

the 1st to 4th Respondents clearly proves that it (1R1) contains the reasons of the 4th Respondent.

This misrepresentation on the part of the Petitioner, clearly indicates lack of bona fides and

undermines the necessity for full disclosure in applications invoking the writ jurisdiction. In the

present application, the Petitioner has failed to submit the complete proceedings before the 4th

Respondent, though the representatives of the Petitioner participated in the inquiry. The

Petitioner has not averred that it ever applied for copies of the said proceedings and that such

proceedings were refused or unable to obtain. This unexplained omission amounts to a

suppression of material facts of a serious nature. A party who seeks the discretionary relief of this

9

Court must present the entire record which contains the disputed decision and failure to do so

undermines the credibility of the petition.

The 1st to 4th Respondents in their objections raised that the Petitioner failed to explain the

inordinate delay in invoking the writ jurisdiction of this Court. The 4th Respondent pronounced

the impugned order on 28th January 2022, whereas the present application was filed only on 11th

September 2024. The Petitioner states at paragraph 20 of the Petition that the delay occurred as

instructions had to be obtained from the United Kingdom. This explanation is wholly

unconvincing. In this digital era, particularly for an internationally popular media company

namely Reuters, the process of seeking instructions does not reasonably require a period over

two years.

In any event, even prior to the digital age, to obtain instructions from a parent or affiliated office

situated in abroad would not have warranted a delay over two years. Particularly, in the case of

an international media company whose operations by their nature depend on the rapid exchange

of information. Hence, the reasons given by the Petitioner to justify the inordinate delay cannot

be accepted as a reasonable explanation to invoke the writ jurisdiction of this Court.

For the foregoing reasons, the Petitioner has failed to furnish a satisfactory explanation for the

inordinate delay of more than two years in invoking the writ jurisdiction of this court. The

Petitioner has further failed to place the complete or necessary proceedings before the 4th

Respondent and has sought to mischaracterise the documents A 9 and A10 as the decision of the

4th Respondent despite the record (1R1) clearly indicating that reasons were given. These

omissions and factual misrepresentations amount to a lack of honesty and undermine the bona

fides with which the Petitioner has approached this court.

Having considered the totality of the circumstances, this Court is compelled to note the manner

in which the Petitioner has approached these proceedings. The overall conduct of the Petitioner

demonstrates a lack of honesty and an abuse of the writ jurisdiction of this Court, while causing

undue prejudice to the 5th Respondent in respect of his statutory entitlements. In these

circumstances, an order for exemplary costs is appropriate to mark the disapproval of such

conduct of the Petitioner and to deter misuse of judicial process.

10

For the foregoing reasons, this Court declines to grant the discretionary relief sought by the

Petitioner. The application is accordingly dismissed. In light of the conduct demonstrated by the

Petitioner as noted earlier in this judgment, exemplary costs in a sum of Rupees One Hundred

Thousand (Rs. 100,000) are imposed on the Petitioner, payable to the 5th Respondent.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Dhammika Ganepola, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL