==== BLOCKS ==== 

WRT/0415/21

Page 1 of 9

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Orders in

the nature of Writs of Certiorari and

Prohibition under and in terms of Article 140

of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Sri Lanka Tea Factory Owners Association,

475 1/1, Nawala Road, Rajagiriya.

PETITIONER

C.A. Case No. WRT/0415/21

Vs.

1. Sri Lanka Tea Board,

No. 574, Galle Road, Colombo 03.

2. E.A.J.K. Edirisinghe,

Tea Commissioner,

Sri Lanka Tea Board,

No. 574, Galle Road, Colombo 03.

2A.K.A.M.K. Jayawardena,

Acting Tea Commissioner,

Sri Lanka Tea Board,

No. 574, Galle Road, Colombo 03.

2B.K.A.M.K. Jayawardena,

Tea Commissioner,

Sri Lanka Tea Board,

No. 574, Galle Road, Colombo 03.

WRT/0415/21

Page 2 of 9

3. K.L. Gunarathna,

President,

Samastha Lanka Kuda Thewathu

Sanwardana Samithi Sanwidanaya

(Also Known as ‘Sri Lanka Federation Tea

Small Holding Development Societies),

No. 70, Parliament Road,

Pellawatta, Battaramulla.

3A. Jagath Senerath Pathirana,

President,

Samastha Lanka Kuda Thewathu

Sanwardana Samithi Sanwidanaya

(Also Known as ‘Sri Lanka Federation Tea

Small Holding Development Societies),

No. 70, Parliament Road,

Pellawatta, Battaramulla.

RESPONDENTS

BEFORE : K. M. G. H. KULATUNGA, J.

COUNSEL : Dr. Romesh De Silva, PC, with Ruwantha Cooray instructed by

Sanath Wijewardane for the Petitioner.

Manohara Jayasinghe, DSG, with Rajika Aluwihare, SC for the 1st

and 2nd Respondents.

Anuja Premaratna, PC, with Imasha Senadeera for the 3rd

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 18.09.2025

DECIDED ON : 16.10.2025

WRT/0415/21

Page 3 of 9

JUDGEMENT

K. M. G. H. KULATUNGA, J.

1. The petitioner, the Sri Lanka Tea Factory Owners Association, is an

incorporated body, which consists of approximately 250 members who

operate tea factories throughout Sri Lanka. The petitioners also claim to

be manufacturers of tea and they purchase green tea leaves. The 1st and

2nd respondents are the regulators of the tea industry and the 3rd

respondent is the President of the Federation of Tea Small Holding

Development Societies, members of which consist of the suppliers of green

tea leaves to the factories.

2. The complaint of the petitioner association is that the Tea Board Circular

bearing No. TC/CIR(204)–06(6)2021, dated 29.06.2021 (P-3), is ultra vires

the provisions of Section 8(2)(b) of the Tea Control Act. The complaint is

twofold: firstly, that the formula prescribed by the said circular is not

factory specific; and secondly, that the specifying of the Price Sharing Ratio

of 68:32, determined as far back as in 1980, is unreasonable and/or

irrational. Accordingly, the petitioner is primarily seeking a writ of certiorari

to quash the said circular.

3. Now it is opportune and necessary to advert to Section 8(2)(b) of the Tea

Control Act which reads as follows:

“(2) Where the Commissioner is satisfied, after such inquiry as he may deem necessary:

(a) that the building, or equipment, or manner of operation, of

any tea factory is not of a standard conducive to the manufacture of made tea of good quality; or (b) that the owner of a tea factory has paid for green tea leaf

bought by him for manufacture at such factory a price lower than the reasonable price payable as determined by the Commissioner having regard to the price fetched for made tea manufactured at that factory; or

(c) that the owner of a tea factory has delayed payment of the

reasonable price, referred to in paragraph (b) for green tea leaf bought by him for manufacture at that factory, the

WRT/0415/21

Page 4 of 9

Commissioner may suspend or cancel where necessary, the registration of such tea factory or

i. in any case referred to in paragraph (b), direct any

broker to whom the owner of such tea factory has sold any made tea manufactured at that factory, to deduct from the proceeds of such sale, an amount equivalent to the difference between the reasonable price for green tea leaf as determined by the Commissioner and the actual price paid by such owner for the green tea leaf bought by him; ii. in any case referred in paragraph (c), direct any

broker to whom the owner of such tea factory has sold any made tea manufactured at that factory, to deduct from the proceeds of such sale, an amount equivalent to the reasonable price determined by the Commissioner for such green tea leaf, and to remit the sum so deducted to him, for payment by him, to the person supplying such green leaf to such factory.” 4. The argument of the petitioner is that Section 8(2)(b), read with the

findings of the Supreme Court in Paudgalika The Kamhal

Himiyange Sangamaya also known as The Private Tea Factory

Owners Association vs. H. D. Hemaratna, Tea Commissioner

and Others (S.C. Appeal No. 47/2011, decided on 09.03.2015),

empowers the Tea Commissioner specifically to determine a factory-

specific reasonable price, and the formula specified by P-3 provides

for a uniform pricing formula. This is the core argument and basis

of this application. The impugned circular is marked and produced

as P-3, according to which the reasonable price for green tea leaves

purchased by tea factories is determined as follows (vide P-3):

“As per the Tea Control Act No. 51 of 1957 as amended, the reasonable price payable for green tea leaf bought by the registered tea manufacturer of a tea factory is determined having regard to the price fetched for made tea, manufactured at that factory and the Tea Commissioner has decided to amend the Circular general elevational average of 8th August, 1988 in the following manner;

WRT/0415/21

Page 5 of 9

1) Sale Average – Sale Average is determined by dividing the

total sale proceeds earned by a specific tea factory within a particular month immediately preceding to the month of calculation by the quantity of made tea sold by that factory through approved channels within the said period.

Ex: Sale Average for January, 2021 =

Total Sale Proceeds earned in January, 2021

Quantity of made tea sold in January, 2021

2) Price Sharing Ratio (68:32) – As per the circular number

MF/BL 74 dated 10th April, 1987

3) Out Turn Ratio – Referring to circular number MF/BL 66 dated

2nd September, 1985, MF/BL 93 dated 30th January 1990 and MF/BL 146 dated 23rd March 1999.”

5. Prior to the formulation of P-3, this issue had been considered by

the Supreme Court in the said decision of S.C. Appeal No. 47/2011.

In the present application, the position of the respondents is that P-

3 was so formulated, taking into consideration the provisions of

Section 8(2)(b) of the Tea Control Act as well as the Supreme Court

decision in S.C. Appeal No. 47/2011 (supra). It is submitted on

behalf of the respondents that the formula provided for in P-3 is in

fact a factory-specific formula and is in accordance with the

abovementioned Supreme Court decision, and the said decision

cannot be assailed or reagitated in the present proceeding.

6. The case of S.C. Appeal No. 47/2011 (supra) considered a decision

of the Court of Appeal where the then prevalent pricing criterion was

upheld. However, the Supreme Court, acting in appeal, held that,

“The Tea Commissioner cannot have a common ‘Reasonable Price Formula’ applicable to all tea factories based on non-factory related elevational average. It is well settled that the expression ‘having regard to’ indicates that in exercising the power, regard must be had to the factor relevant for the exercise of that power.”

Further, it was also observed by their Lordships that,

“The said section empowers the Tea Commissioner to determine the reasonable price payable, having regard to the price fetched for made tea at that factory. The use of the words ‘at that factory’

WRT/0415/21

Page 6 of 9

signifies that the reasonable price varies from one factory to another.”

Having so observed, their Lordships of the Supreme Court held,

“Thus, the Reasonable Price envisaged in Section 8(2)(b) has to be necessarily factory specific and not a formula of equal of application to all factories. Accordingly, I hold that the letters marked P12 and P13 sent by the Tea Commissioner based on the ‘Reasonable Price Formula’ were ultra vires the powers of the Tea Commissioner and are set aside.” The finding and the determination of the Supreme Court is that the

reasonable price should be factory-specific, having regard to the

price fetched for made tea at such factory.

7. Accordingly, their Lordships of the Supreme Court held that the

general elevational average-based formula is not factory-specific.

What was considered by the Supreme Court was the pricing formula

based on the general elevational average, which, in simple terms, is

the price determined by the elevation of the geographical situation

of the respective factory. This is not a formula on a variable, so to

say, but a classification based on elevation. It is for this reason that

the general elevational average was held to be not factory-specific

and was considered as being a uniform formula.

8. However, P-3, as stated above, contained three sub-paragraphs

upon which the reasonable price is to be determined for green tea

leaf. As to items (2) and (3), they are of common application, being

the Price Sharing Ratio between the factory and the leaf producer

and the Out Turn Ratio, a formula based on a scientific basis taking

into account the moisture content, which varies in relation to

monsoonal and non-monsoonal seasons. The relevant consideration

which makes this formula factory-specific is item (1), the Sale

Average, which is determined by the formula given therein. The basis

of calculation of the amount to be paid to the manufacturer or the

supplier is based on and pegged to the average price fetched by the

sale proceeds of the specific tea factory within a particular month

WRT/0415/21

Page 7 of 9

immediately preceding the month of calculation. Thus, the specific

sale price of the finished product of the particular factory during the

specified period divided by the quantity of made tea sold during such

month will finally determine the reasonable price.

9. Thus, the formula provided for in P-3 may be applied uniformly to

all tea factories. However, the data that would be applied would vary

according to each individual factory. Hence, the reasonable price will

be determined in relation to such specific price of such factory. As

the sale price and average is unique, peculiar, and specific to such

factory, the end result necessarily is factory-specific. This was what

the Supreme Court laid down and that which is also required by

Section 8(2)(b). Their Lordships of the Supreme Court apart from

considering the vires of the then prevalent Circular in determining

S.C. Appeal No. 47/2011, also held that the general elevational

average was ultra vires Section 8(2)(b).

10. The formula prescribed by P-3 proceeds on the premise and initial

determination of the Sale Average (item 1). The Price Sharing Ratio

(item 2) and the Out Turn Ratio (item 3) are applied and come into

operation and consideration, subject to and upon the determination

of the Sale Average of such factory. Therefore, the total outcome of

the application of all three sub-paragraphs in determining the

reasonable price, as provided for by P-3, is a factory-specific

determination. One cannot consider the 2nd and 3rd limbs of this

formula in isolation. If I may further elaborate, when the base figure,

the Sale Average is factory-specific, determination of the reasonable

price upon the application of the Price Sharing Ratio and the Out

Turn Ratio will continue to be and have the initial attribute of being

factory-specific. Accordingly, I hold that the three components

pricing formula prescribed by P-3 is in accordance with and intra

vires the provisions of Section 8(2)(b) and also is in accordance with

the Supreme Court decision in S.C. Appeal No. 47/2011.

WRT/0415/21

Page 8 of 9

11. It is submitted on behalf of the petitioner that circular P-3 is

unreasonable and is arbitrary within the meaning of the

Wednesbury-type irrationality as adopted in Sri Lanka. In support

of which the petitioner relies on the decision in Premachandra vs.

Jayawickrema and Bakeer Markar and Others 1993 2 SLR 294,

where it was opined as follows:

“The exercise of the powers vested in the Governor of a Province under Article 154F (4), excluding the proviso, is not solely a matter for his subjective assessment and judgment; it is subject to judicial review by the Court of Appeal. In applications for Quo Warranto, Certiorari and Mandamus, the Court of Appeal has power to review the appointment, inter alia, for unreasonableness, or if made in bad faith, or in disregard of the relevant evidence, or on irrelevant considerations, or without evidence.”

12. Based on this test, the pricing formula pegged to and based on the

average sale price cannot, by any stretch of the imagination, be

considered as being irrational or unreasonable; on the contrary, it is

the most relevant factor in fairly determining a reasonable price,

which therefore results in a reasonable price which is factory-

specific as afore considered. In the above circumstances, it is

apparent that the petitioner’s argument is misconceived, as an

attempt is made to consider the three components separately and in

isolation.

13. The second complaint is that the Price Sharing Ratio of 68:32 is

unreasonable and/or irrational and not relevant in the current

context. Apart from the petitioner making a bare allegation, there is

no material that has been placed before the Tea Commissioner or

this Court to support this contention. In the first instance, the

petitioner ought to have negotiated with the Tea Commissioner on

the Price Sharing Ratio if there was any change of circumstances

that warranted a change of the same. As no such specific material is

placed before this Court and in the absence of any material, I see no

basis to consider this ground any further, as it is baseless and

misconceived.

WRT/0415/21

Page 9 of 9

14. In the above premises, I see no merit in the arguments advanced,

and I find that the petitioner has failed to establish any lawful basis

that entitles the petitioner to the relief as prayed for.

15. I observe that the petitioner or its members, having been parties in

the Supreme Court or privy to the said decision, is now making an

attempt to reagitate the issue finally settled by the Supreme Court.

This appears to be a subtle attempt to abuse the judicial process.

The petitioner, not being pleased with the determination of the

reasonable price calculated on the formula as provided for by P-3, is

making an attempt to disjoin the components of the formula and

advance and develop an argument which, to my mind, is an attempt

to mislead. Since the determination by the Supreme Court, the

matter being well-settled, and then with the formulation of the

criteria in P-3 in 2021, the petitioner, once again, is reagitating what

was settled by the Supreme Court. This application, therefore,

appears to be unfounded and ill-conceived. Therefore I see no merit

in this application.

16. Accordingly, this application is dismissed, subject to costs in a sum

of Rs.100,000.00 to be paid to the 1st respondent Tea Board, and the

3A respondent, the Sri Lanka Federation of Tea Small Holdings

Development Association, and each of the said respondents is to be

paid a sum of Rs.50,000.00, respectively, by the petitioner. The total

sum the petitioner is required to pay as costs is thus Rs.100,000.00.

Application dismissed subject to costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL