CA/HCC/0334/19

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979, read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

The Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT

Court of Appeal Case No: Liyanage Susil Prematilaka alias

CA/HCC /0334/2019 Thilaka

High Court of Gampaha

Case No. HC/49/2008

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

Liyanage Susil Prematilaka alias

Thilaka

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

CA/HCC/0334/19

2 | P a g e

The Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

P.Kumararatnam, J.

COUNSEL : Nihara Randeniya for the Appellant.

Dilan Ratnayake, ASG for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 03/05/2024

DECIDED ON : 02/08/2024

***************************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted in the High Court of Gampaha under Section 296 of

the Penal Code for committing the murder of Adikari Arachchige Ariya

Nandani Perera on or about 21st February 2005.

The trial commenced before the High Court Judge of Gampaha as the

Appellant had opted for a non-jury trial.

CA/HCC/0334/19

3 | P a g e

After the conclusion of the prosecution case, the learned High Court Judge

had called for the defence and the Appellant made a dock statement and

closed his case. After considering the evidence presented by both parties, the

learned High Court Judge had convicted the Appellant under Section 296 of

Penal Code and sentenced him to death on 04/10/2019.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent to argue this matter in his absence. Also, at the time of

argument the Appellant was connected via Zoom from prison.

Following appeal grounds were advanced by the Appellant.

1. That the Learned High Court Judge failed to consider the well

settled principle of law relating to a case entirely based on

circumstantial evidence.

2. That the Learned trial judge convicted the Appellant based only on

the fingerprint found on the handle of the almirah.

3. That the Learned trial judge made use of the weakness of the

defense evidence to strengthen the case for the prosecution.

4. That the Learned trial judge failed to analyze the defense evidence

in the correct perspective and rejected the same on wrong premise.

Background of the case is albeit as follows:

The deceased was an elderly woman who lived alone in her residence. Her

children lived separately after marriage, but often visited, and spent time

with her. Her death was discovered upon inquiry by one of her daughters as

the deceased failed to answer telephone calls continually.

When PW4 went to the deceaseds house to look for her, he had seen her

lying fallen near a Budha statue in the house.

CA/HCC/0334/19

4 | P a g e

PW2, who stayed at the deceaseds house on the previous night had gone for

his employment. He had come back home after his sister informed him about

the tragedy.

The police had visited the scene of crime after receiving first information at

about 10.15 am. As the house had been ransacked, the police had called the

finger print experts to the crime scene for further investigation. The finger

prints officers arrived the crime scene at 11.15 am and their investigation

was carried out for about three hours.

JMO who had conducted the post mortem of the deceased had given very

comprehensive evidence regarding the findings mentioned in his report. The

JMO had noted six stab wounds, three cut wounds and two contusions on

the body of the deceased. Two stabs to the side of the chest and two stab

injuries to the neck had been classified as injuries fatal in the ordinary

course of nature. According to the JMO, the cause of death has been given

as shock and hemorrhage due to deep penetrating wounds to the liver and

main artery.

In the first ground of appeal, the Counsel for the Appellant contended that

the Learned High Court Judge failed to consider the well settled principle of

law relating to a case entirely based on circumstantial evidence.

In this case, to find the Appellant guilty of the charge, all the circumstances

must point at him that he is the one who committed the murder of the

deceased and not anybody else. It is the incumbent duty of the prosecution

to prove the same beyond reasonable doubt.

Although the Learned High Court Judge had not expressly mentioned that

he had applied the principles governing the evaluation of circumstantial

evidence, he had considered all the circumstances to come to his conclusion.

This is clearly reflected in the plain reading of the judgment.

Further, the Learned High Court Judge had correctly narrated all the

witnesses who gave evidence in his judgment. PW4, Wijeratne who had gone

CA/HCC/0334/19

5 | P a g e

to the deceaseds house after he was informed that the deceased was not

answering the phone, he had first discovered the deceased who was lying

fallen on a pool of blood near the Buddha statue. Upon passing this

information, all children of the deceased had come there and found that all

cupboards and almirahs were pulled out and the contents were thrown out.

The Appellant was arrested on the same day of the incident and a knife was

recovered from the deceaseds kitchen. Further, fingerprints were uplifted at

the crime scene by PW15. Sample fingerprints of the Appellant were taken at

the Sapugaskanda Police Station by PW17 and sent to the Registrar of

Fingerprints for analysis. This had been recorded as an admission under

Section 420 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

Fingerprint photo uplifted from the almirah handle of the deceased, which

was marked as P4 was compared positively with the fingerprint sample of

the Appellant. Taking sample fingerprints were contented even in the cross-

examination.

Further, Report of the Registrar of Fingerprint which had been marked as P5

was marked an admission under the CPC. In that report the Registrar of

Fingerprint confirmed that the fingerprint found on the deceaseds almirah

handle is a match with the fingerprint taken by the Sapugaskanda Police.

In the case of C.Chenga Reddy and others v. State of A.P.(1996) 10 SCC

193 the court held that:

In a case based on circumstantial evidence, the settled law is that the

circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is drawn should be

fully proved and such circumstances must be conclusive in nature.

Moreover, all the circumstances should be complete and there should be

no gap left in the chain of evidence. Further the proved circumstances

must be consistent only with the hypothesis of guilt of the accused and

totally inconsistent with his innocence.

CA/HCC/0334/19

6 | P a g e

In the case of McGreevy v. Director of Public Prosecution [1973] 1

W.L.R.276 the court held that:

There is no requirement, in cases in which the prosecutions case is

based on circumstantial evidence that the judge direct the jury to acquit

unless they are sure of the facts proved are not only consistent with guilt

but also inconsistent with any other reasonable conclusion. The question

for the jury is whether the facts as they find them to be drive them to

the conclusion, so that they are sure, that the defendant is guilty.

In the case of Attorney General v. Potta Naufer & others [2007) 2 SLR

144 the court held that:

When relying on circumstantial evidence to establish the charge of

conspiracy to commit murder and the charge of murder, the proved items

of circumstantial evidence when taken together must irresistibly point

towards the only inference that the accused committed the offence.

In the case of Kusumadasa v. State [2011] 1 SLR 240 the court held that:

The prosecution must prove that no one else other than the accused

had the opportunity of committing the offence. The accused can be found

guilty and only if the proved items of circumstantial evidence is

consistent with their guilt and inconsistent with their innocence.

In Premawansha v. Attorney General [2009] 2 SLR 205 the court held

that:

In circumstantial evidence if an inference of guilt is to be drawn, such

an inference must be the one and only irresistible and inescapable

conclusion that the accused committed the offence.

CA/HCC/0334/19

7 | P a g e

Guided by the aforementioned judgments, I conclude that the circumstantial

evidence presented in this trial is sufficient to determine that the Appellant

had committed the murder of the deceased. Therefore, the first ground lacks

merit.

In the second ground of appeal the Appellant contends that the Learned trial

judge convicted the Appellant based only on the fingerprint found on the

handle of the almirah.

Section 45 of the Evidence Ordinance states:

When the court has to form an opinion as to foreign law, or of science,

or art, or as to identity or genuineness of handwriting or finger

impressions, palm impressions or foot impressions, the opinions upon

that point of persons specially skilled in such foreign law, science, or

art, or in questions as to identity or genuineness of handwriting or

finger impressions, palm impressions or foot impressions, are relevant

facts. Such persons are called experts.

In The Queen v. Wijehamy 62 NLR 425 the Court of Appeal held that:

Under Section 45 of the Evidence Ordinance it is for the court to

form an opinion as to the identity of finger and palm impressions,

assisted by the opinion of an expert.

In the King v. Jayasena [1933] 2 CLW the court held that:

A conviction can be based on finger print evidence alone, in the

absence of a satisfactory explanation from the accused.

CA/HCC/0334/19

8 | P a g e

According to PW15, he had gone to the scene of crime at 11.15 hours and

remained there till 14.30 hours. When he went to the crime scene it was fully

secured by the police officers who were assigned to secure the place.

According to PW10, the chief investigating officer, the Appellant was arrested

at 16.00 hours upon an information. Hence, it was quite clear that the

Appellant was arrested by the police after the upliftment of the fingerprint

from the handle of the almirah in the house of the deceased.

Although, the Counsel for the Appellant suggested to the police witnesses

that he was taken to the crime scene after his arrest, it was not suggested to

prosecution witnesses that his fingerprint was forcibly placed on the handle

of the almirah. Further, taking sample of the Appellants fingerprints at

Sapugaskanda was admitted by the defense.

Furthermore, although the Appellant made a dock statement, he did not

provide any explanation for how his fingerprint was found on the handle of

the almirah inside the deceased's house. The Learned High Court Judge had

very correctly considered the fingerprint evidence and went on to conclude

that there is no doubt that the fingerprint found on the almirah handle as it

was identical to the fingerprint of the Appellant obtained by the

Sapugaskanda Police.

Considering the evidence presented pertaining to the fingerprint impression

of the Appellant, Appellants failure to give explanation and being guided by

the above-mentioned judgments, the acceptance of fingerprint evidence has

not caused any prejudice in this case. As such this ground also devoid of any

merit.

As the 3rd and 4th grounds of appeal are interconnected, the Counsel for the

Appellant dealt the same together in his argument. In the 3rd and 4th grounds

of appeal the Appellant contended that the Learned trial judge made use of

CA/HCC/0334/19

9 | P a g e

the weakness of the defense evidence to strengthen the case for the

prosecution and failed to analyze the defense evidence in the correct

perspective and rejected the same on wrong premise.

Nowhere in his judgment the Learned High Court Judge had used or relied

on the weak defense evidence to strengthen the prosecution case. The

evidence led by the defense fails to challenge the strong prosecution case.

The Learned High Court Judge had very correctly rejected the recovery of the

knife under Section 27(1) of the Evidence Ordinance. At pages 196-197 the

Learned High Court Judge had very correctly considered the defenses case

and had given his reasons as to why he rejects the same. As most damaging

evidence against the Appellant is the fingerprint evidence which was not

explained at all by the Appellant.

In King v Logus 34 NLR 255 the court held that:

That, in the absence of any explanation by the accused as to how

his finger prints came to appear on the glass plane, the Court was

justified in concluding that the accused was one of the burglars;

In Singo Appu v The King 46 NLR 49 the court held that:

Where on an indictment for housebreaking and theft, the only evidence

against the accused was that of a foot-print which was found on a table

at the scene of the offence and which was identified as that of the

accused by an expert who gave adequate reasons for his opinion.

Held, that the Court could convict the accused on the evidence of

the foot-print though it was the sole ground of identification.

The Learned High Court Judge had considered the evidence adduced by the

Appellant in his judgment. But the evidence adduced by the prosecution is

overwhelming and the evidence given by the Appellant will not able to create

CA/HCC/0334/19

10 | P a g e

any doubt over the prosecution case. Hence, theses grounds of appeal also

have no merit.

As discussed under appeal grounds, the prosecution had adduced strong

and incriminating circumstantial evidence against the Appellant. The

Learned High Court Judge had very correctly analyzed all the evidence

presented by both parties and concluded that the Appellant is guilty to the

charge of murder.

As the Learned High Court Judge had rightly convicted the Appellant for the

charge of murder, I affirm the conviction and dismiss the Appeal of the

Appellant.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Gampaha along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL