Page 1 of 4

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Appeal Case No: Court of

CPA 56/2022

High Court of Negombo Case No:

HC 191/21

Magistrates Court of Welisara Case

No: 739/19

In the matter of an application for

Revision under Article 138 of the

Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

The Hon. Attorney General,

The Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant

Vs.

Warnakulasooriyage Maduranga Fernando

(Currently held in Remand custody

in Negombo)

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Warnakulasooriyage Maduranga Fernando

Petitioner

Vs

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department

Colombo 12.

Respondents

Page 2 of 4

Before: Menaka Wijesundera J.

Neil Iddawala J.

Counsel: Hafeel Fariz for the Petitioner.

Y. Abeywickrema for the State. DSG.

Argued on: 08.11.2022

Decided on: 06.12.2022

MENAKA WIJESUNDERA J.

The instant application has been filed to obtain bail to the accused namely

Waranakulasuriyage Maduranga Fernando under the provisions of the Poisons

Opium and Dangerous Drugs Act.

The Counsel for the accused contended that he had been arrested in 2019 along

with three others for being in possession of a substance suspected to be heroin

while travelling in a vehicle. The Government Analyst report had revealed the

substance to be heroin and the alleged quantity to be 20 grams.

The Counsel further submitted that the case is a total fabrication and that they

had requested the tower reports to prove that the arrest had not taken place as

alleged by the police, but in the meantime the Attorney General had discharged

the other three suspects and had indicted the accused in the High Court of

Negambo in 2022.

Page 3 of 4

Upon the service of the indictment the Counsel for the accused had made an

application for bail but it had been refused on the basis that in view of the

quantity of the heroin bail can be considered once the main witnesses of the

prosecution are over.

The Counsel appearing for the Respondents objected to the instant application

on the basis of lack of exceptional circumstances.

The law pertaining to the instant application is that if a person is indicted or

arrested under the provisions of the above mentioned act bail can be considered

only upon exceptional circumstances, but the statute has not defined the term

exceptional. But the cases so far decided has defined exceptional circumstances

to be decided on facts of each case, and this has been very clearly stated in the

case of Ramu Thamodarumpillai vs. The Attorney General, although it is case

after the trial pending the appeal.

The instant matter is during trial hence the most important aspect here is to

make sure that the accused appears to face the trial hence the likelihood of

absconding is lesser than when considering bail pending the appeal.

The main contention of the Counsel for the accused is that the instant case is a

fabrication by the prosecution witnesses but as stated in the recently decided

case in the Supreme Court 53-2022 that creditworthiness of witnesses and

morality cannot be considered in a bail application under the above mentioned

act., but this Court observes that the learned High Court Judge had stated that

bail would be considered upon the conclusion of the main witnesses of the

prosecution, hence we direct the learned High Court Judge to expedite this

matter and consider bail upon the conclusion of the main witness of the

prosecution as per his order dated 1.4.2022.

Page 4 of 4

As such the instant application is dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.

I agree.

Neil Iddawala J.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.