CA/HCC/119/23

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal Case No. Wanigasekara Mudiyanselage Chamila

CA/HCC/ 0119/2023 Suranga

High Court of Monaragala

Case No. HC/227/2019

APPELLANT

vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

K. M. G. H. Kulatunga, J.

CA/HCC/119/23

2 | P a g e

COUNSEL : Niroshan Mihindukulasuriya for

the Appellant.

Jayalakshi De Silva, SSC for the

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 10/03/2025

DECIDED ON : 04/04/2025

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Appellant was indicted by the Attorney General under

Section 365B (2) (b) of the Penal Code for committing one count of grave

sexual abuse on Wanugasuriya Mudiyanselage Thakshila Maduwanthi on

25.01.2018. The Appellant is the biological father of the victim.

The trial commenced on 12.11.2021. After leading all necessary witnesses,

the prosecution closed the case. The learned High Court Judge had called

for the defence and the Appellant had given evidence from the witness box

and closed his case.

CA/HCC/119/23

3 | P a g e

The learned High Court Judge after considering the evidence presented by

both parties before him and his predecessor, convicted the Appellant as

charged and sentenced the Appellant to 12 years of rigorous imprisonment

and imposed a fine of Rs.15,000/- subject to a default sentence of 03 months

rigorous imprisonment.

In addition, a compensation of Rs.300,000/- was ordered with a default

sentence of 06 months rigorous imprisonment.

The learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent to argue this matter in his absence. During the argument

he was connected via Zoom platform from prison.

The Facts of this case albeit briefly are as follows.

PW1 - the victim of this case, had been about 12 years old when she faced

this grave violation. When she gave evidence, she was 15 years old and was

still schooling. The victim has one sibling and she had been in grade 08 at

the time of this incident.

The alleged incident had happened during the night when the victim was fast

asleep. She had suddenly woken up in the middle of the night and to her

utter bewilderment, had found her father lying on her body naked. She had

then seen that her under garment had been lowered down to her knees and

had felt some sticky substance on her thighs. The Appellant had told her not

to divulge this incident to anybody or else he would be sent to the jail. At

that time the victims mother was receiving in house treatment at Badulla

General Hospital for her mental condition. The victims narration of events

in Court concurred with the history given to the doctor. Due to fear and the

respect placed on the Appellant she had not divulged this incident to

anybody initially. The Appellant had also told her not to tell anybody.

CA/HCC/119/23

4 | P a g e

She had first told her grandmother when she went to Bibile with her mother

who was discharged from the hospital. As somebody had given a call to the

Police Emergency about the incident, the police had come to her school and

commenced investigations.

The JMO who had examined the victim had not excluded the possibility of

sexual abuse.

After the closure of the prosecutions case, the defence was called, and the

Appellant denied the charges while he gave evidence from the witness box.

The following Grounds of Appeal were raised on behalf of the Appellant:

1. Did the learned High Court Judge misdirect himself in arriving at the

conclusion that all the ingredients of the charge were proven beyond

reasonable doubt.

In a case of this nature, the testimonial trustworthiness and credibility of

PW1, mainly the probability of the occurrence of events as recounted by her

should be assessed with utmost care and caution by the Trial Judge. The

learned Trial Judge must satisfy and accept the evidence of a child witness

after assessing her competence and credibility as a witness.

In Ranjeet Kumar Ram v. State of Bihar [2015] SCC Online SC 500 the

court held that:

Evidence of the child witness and its credibility would depend upon the

circumstances of each case. Only precaution which the court has to bear

in mind while assessing the evidence of a child witness is that the

witness must be a reliable one.

CA/HCC/119/23

5 | P a g e

The learned Counsel strenuously argued that the prosecution has failed to

provide any evidence that the Appellant did any act by using his penis or any

other part of his body or any instrument on any orifice or part of the body of

the victim for his sexual gratification.

The learned High Court Judge in his judgment had very correctly analysed

the evidence of the prosecutrix and given reasons as to why he accepted the

same.

In The Attorney General v. Sandanam Pitchai Mary Theresa [2011] 2 SLR

292 the court held that:

Whilst internal contradictions or discrepancies would ordinarily affect

the trustworthiness of the witness statement, it is well established that

the Court must exercise its judgment on the nature of the inconsistency

or contradiction and whether they are true material to the facts in issue.

In this case, the creditworthiness of the evidence given by the victim did not

suffer at any stage of the trial. I too agree that the contradictions and the

omission highlighted in the evidence of the victim is not forceful enough to

shake the credibility of the victim or the core issues of the case against the

Appellant.

The learned High Court Judge had considered the evidence given by PW1

with caution and care and had correctly held that her evidence is convincing

and cogent and sufficient on its own to prove the case against the Appellant.

In criminal law, the presumption of innocence is a fundamental

principle that requires the prosecution to prove the guilt of the accused

beyond reasonable doubt.

CA/HCC/119/23

6 | P a g e

Considering the evidence led in this case and guided by the judgements

mentioned above, I conclude that this is not an appropriate case in which

the judgement delivered by the learned High Court Judge on 28/04/2023

against the Appellant can be interfered upon. I therefore, dismiss the appeal.

Having considering the circumstances of this case, I order the sentence to be

operative from the date of sentence namely on 28.04.2023.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgement to the High

Court of Monaragala along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K. M. G. H. KULATUNGA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL