Page 1 of 10

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of section

331 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act

No- 15 of 1979, read with Article 138 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

CA/HCC/0129/2019 COMPLAINANT

Vs.

High Court of Colombo Thajudeen Mohomad Fahim

Case No: HC/6046/2012 ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

Thajudeen Mohomad Fahim

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENT

Page 2 of 10

Before : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

: P. Kumararatnam, J.

Counsel : Ranil Samarasooriya with Nalaka Samarakoon and

Rajinda Kandegedara for the Accused-Appellant

: Janaka Bandara, DSG for the Respondent

Argued on : 28-11-2022

Written Submissions : 08-02-2021 (By the Accused-Appellant)

: 24-03-2021 (By the Respondent)

Decided on : 26-01-2023

Sampath B Abayakoon, J.

The accused appellant (hereinafter referred to as the appellant) was indicted

before the High Court of Colombo for committing the offence of cheating on or

about 11th October 2007, by fraudulently and dishonestly deceiving one

Mohomad Marshum and inducing him to deposit Rs. 25 million to the bank

accounts named with the promise of delivering two jeeps, and intentionally

inducing the said person so deceived to do or omit to do anything which he would

not do or omit if he was not so deceived, and thereby committing an offence

punishable in terms of section 403 of the Penal Code.

After trial, the learned High Court Judge of Colombo, by his judgement dated

19-03-2019 found the appellant guilty as charged and he was sentenced to 4

years simple imprisonment and was ordered to pay a fine of Rs. 25000/-. He was

sentenced to 5 months simple imprisonment in default of paying the fine.

The appellant was also ordered to pay Rs. 25 million, which was the amount so

cheated as a compensation to PW-01 in terms of section 17 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act. If he fails to pay, it was ordered to recover the said

Page 3 of 10

compensation as a fine, and a default sentence of 18 months simple

imprisonment was ordered.

Being aggrieved by the said conviction and the sentence, the appellant preferred

this appeal.

The facts that led to the indictment and the conviction can be summarized as

follows.

PW-01 who is the person alleged to have deceived by the appellant was a

businessman primarily dealing in electrical goods. Later, he has commenced a

partnership business of dealing in vehicles where he was the main partner. He

had that business in Colombo, which he has commenced in the year 2005.

The appellant was also a person dealing in vehicles, and both the appellant and

PW-01 have been doing business with each other based on trust. According to

the evidence of PW-01, they have had transactions of over 50 vehicles by the time

the incident relevant to this charge occurred. It was his evidence that the

appellant informed him that he is in possession of two Toyota Prado vehicles and

that he can give them to him for Rs. 25 million. Agreeing to have the vehicles,

PW-01 has deposited the above mentioned Rs. 25 million in two bank accounts

owned by PW-02 and 03, as instructed by the appellant. After the appellant

obtained the money, he has failed to deliver the vehicles as promised. Since his

attempts to obtain the vehicles from the appellant failed, and realizing that he

was cheated, PW-01 has made a written complaint to the Criminal Investigations

Department. After investigations, the appellant was indicted for the offence of

cheating.

PW-02 and 03, to whose accounts PW-01 had deposited the money has given

evidence and confirmed that the money was deposited as claimed by PW-01 and

they handed over the money to the appellant. The evidence establishes that PW-

01 has deposited the money on 11th October 2007. He has deposited Rs.

12,470,000 to the account of PW-03 and another sum of Rs. 12,530,000 to the

account of PW-02.

Page 4 of 10

In this matter, the appellant has never denied that the money was given to him

by PW-01 in the manner stated by him in his evidence. When PW-01 gave

evidence, the position taken up by the appellant was that the mentioned Rs. 25

million and the promise to hand over two Prado jeeps to PW-01 had no

connection, and the transaction in relation to Rs. 25 million had already been

concluded in full and the PW-01 falsely implicated the appellant in this regard.

PW-01 has dismissed the claim that the transaction was not in relation to the

two jeeps. It has also been the position of the PW-01 that as a businessman

dealing in vehicles, his intention was to obtain the two jeeps for the sum

mentioned and sell it later at a profit, and thereby he suffered a loss due to the

fraudulent actions of the appellant.

When called for a defence after the prosecution case was closed, the appellant

has made a statement from the dock. It has been his position that he and PW-

01 engaged in electrical goods business and were also vehicle dealers. He has

admitted that he has given over 50-60 vehicles to the PW-01. He has admitted

that PW-01 wanted to have two Prado vehicles and has claimed that the vehicles

were delivered to him and he paid money for the two vehicles. He has claimed

that when he needed money to be invested in his business, PW-01 agreed to do

so and deposited the disputed amount of Rs.25 million to the two accounts of

PW-02 and 03 who were vehicle importers at his request. He has claimed the

intention of PW-01 and himself was to make a profit out of the importation and

sale of the vehicles, and share the profits. He has claimed that after the vehicles

were imported to Sri Lanka, he sold the vehicles through vehicle sales agents,

but could not derive any profit out of the sale. Because of PW-01s belief that he

is hiding the profits earned through this transaction, he has made a complaint

of cheating against him was his position.

The Grounds of Appeal

At the hearing of this appeal, the learned Counsel for the appellant urged the

following grounds of appeal for the consideration of the Court.

Page 5 of 10

1. The prosecution failed to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt

against the appellant.

2. The learned High Court Judge has failed to give due concession to the

contradiction marked V-01.

3. The learned High Court Judge has predetermined the matter.

It was the contention of the learned Counsel for the appellant that in order to

prove this case, it was imperative to the prosecution to prove that the appellant

deceived the PW-01 fraudulently or dishonestly and induced him to hand over

the money as alleged.

It was his view that the prosecution has failed to prove that the deposit of the

money was for the transaction as claimed by PW-01. It was his contention that

as partners in a business, PW-01 and the appellant had engaged in transactions

upon trust, and the transaction in relation to handing over of two Prado jeeps

was a transaction that had been concluded between the parties. It was his

position that the evidence of PW-07, the investigating officer shows that the

transaction was an investment and not a matter of cheating as claimed.

It was his argument that this was a transaction that is civil in nature and there

was no basis to charge the appellant for cheating. He also points to the fact that

even if the defence taken up by an accused person is weak, that is not a matter

that can lead to a conclusion that the prosecution has proved its case.

Referring to the contradiction marked V-01 and the views expressed by the

learned High Court Judge in the judgement where it has been concluded that

the said contradiction may be a result of forgetfulness of PW-01, was not

warranted, it was his position that the learned High Court Judge cannot come

to such a conclusion in the absence of any evidence that can lead to such an

inference. It was also his contention that the learned High Court Judge has

mainly considered the infirmities in the defence of the appellant in order to find

the appellant guilty, which was not the correct way of analyzing evidence. He

Page 6 of 10

moved for an acquittal of the appellant on the basis that the prosecution has

failed to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt against the appellant.

Making submissions before this Court on behalf of the respondent, it was the

view of the learned Deputy Solicitor General (DSG) that in order to prove a charge

of cheating, it becomes necessary for the prosecution to prove that the person

concerned was deceived fraudulently and dishonestly induced to do or not to do

the act mentioned in the charge.

It was his view that since the appellant has admitted having received the money,

his claim that the money was received for a different purpose has no basis. It

was his contention that the learned High Court Judge has considered the defence

evidence and the defence put forward by the appellant in order to find whether

it has created a reasonable doubt or has provided an explanation in relation to

the allegation against the appellant, in view of the admissions. It was his position

that the learned High Court Judge has not predetermined the matter, but has

only considered the evidence in the manner required in a criminal case.

Consideration of The Grounds of Appeal

As the three grounds of appeal are grounds mainly based on the premise that

the prosecution has failed to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt, and the

learned High Court Judge was misdirected in that regard, I will now proceed to

consider all the three grounds of appeal together.

The offence of cheating as described in section 398 of the Penal Code reads;

398. Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently or dishonesty

induces the person so deceived to deliver any property to any person,

or to consent that any person shall retain nay property, or

intentionally induces the person so deceived to do or omit to do

anything which he would not do or omit if he were not so deceived,

and which act or omission causes or is likely to cause damage or harm

Page 7 of 10

to that person in body, mind, reputation, or property or damage or

loss to the government, is said to cheat.

When considering the charge preferred against the appellant, it is clear that it

has been on the basis that the appellant intentionally induced the PW-01 who

was so deceived to do anything which he would not do if he was not so deceived.

I am of the view that in order to prove the charge against the appellant, the

prosecution needs to prove that the deceiving was done fraudulently or

dishonestly with the intention of cheating.

In the case of Zahir Vs. Cooray (1941) 42 NLR 263, it was stated by Howard

C.J.:

The offence of cheating is defined in section 398 of the Penal Code. In order

to establish such an offence, it must be proved that the deceit induced the

person deceived to do or omit to do something which he would not to or omit

if he were not so deceived and which act or omission causes or is likely to

cause damage to that person in body, mind, reputation or property.

When it comes to the facts of the matter under appeal, it is clear that the PW-01

and the appellant had been doing business together based on trust. As both of

them were in the business of dealing in vehicles. There had been vehicle

transactions between them and money in relation to such transactions has been

regularly transacted between them. The evidence also undisputed that they have

transacted money through various third parties for the purpose of conducting

business.

The appellant has not denied that Rs. 25 million was given to him by PW-01

through PW-02 and 03. His initial claim has been that transaction in relation to

the two vehicles allegedly promised to be supplied by him was over, and handing

over of 25 million to him by PW-01 was in relation to another transaction.

Page 8 of 10

However, in his dock statement, it has been his position that this was done on

the basis of sharing profit, but he could not return the money as he was unable

to make a profit out of the said vehicle transaction.

It is well settled law that if an accused person is taking up a position in a case

where he was criminally charged, that position must be put to the relevant

witnesses at the appropriate time.

When PW-01 who was the person alleged to have been fraudulently and

dishonestly deceived by the appellant was giving evidence, the appellants

position had been that there was no connection between Rs. 25 million and two

Prado vehicles and the transaction in relation to Rs. 25 million has been

completed without any due and that is the reason why the appellant is in no

possession of any documents in relation to the alleged vehicle transaction.

He has failed to put any questions to the appellant in the manner which would

support his position taken in his dock statement where he has referred in detail

about the money being given to him by PW-01 to import vehicles and sell them

at a profit and share the proceeds. It had been the position of the appellant that

money was given to PW-02 and 03 who were vehicle importers to import vehicles

through them. However, he has failed to put that position to PW-01 when he

gave evidence.

The said persons mentioned by the appellant, namely, PW-02 and 03 have given

evidence in this matter. They have confirmed that the money deposited by PW-

01 into their accounts was handed over to the appellant. It appears from their

evidence that they are relatives of the appellant and through their accounts,

money had been regularly transacted by the appellant. If it was the position of

the appellant that they are vehicle importers and the amount relevant to this

action was deposited to their accounts for such a purpose, the appellant should

have put that position when they were giving evidence so that they can answer

such a claim, which the appellant has failed to do.

Page 9 of 10

The contradiction marked V-01 needs to be considered under these

circumstances to find whether it has created any doubt as to the evidence of the

prosecution.

I find that the learned High Court Judge has considered the said contradiction

in that context, and in doing so, he has considered the admitted facts to come to

a finding that the said contradiction is not a matter that goes into the root of the

action.

In the first information letter provided by the PW-01 to the police, which is the

document marked P-01, he has stated that he had firm orders for two Prado

vehicles and that was the reason why he deposited the money as instructed by

the appellant. However, in his evidence before the Court, he has stated that he

had no firm orders, but his intention was to have the two vehicles and sell it at

a profit.

As determined correctly by the learned High Court Judge, I am not in a position

to conclude that this was a contradiction that creates a doubt in relation to the

evidence when taken in its totality, as the handing over of Rs. 25 million to the

appellant by PW-01 was not a disputed fact. This transaction has taken place in

the year 2005. Given the value of money that can be attributed to that year, 25

million is an amount that nobody would give to a third party without any

purpose. It is clear from the evidence of PW-01, that he has given this money in

order to have two vehicles as promised by the appellant. Although appellant has

admitted having taken the money, his position has been that the money was

given to him not for the purpose of giving two Prado jeeps to PW-01, but for the

purpose of importing other vehicles and selling and sharing profits. According to

his own admission, even that has not been done which shows that the appellant

had no intention of returning the money or the profits he claimed, under any

circumstance.

I find that the learned High Court Judge has considered the version of events

put forward by the appellant in order to find whether the story has created a

Page 10 of 10

doubt as to the evidence of the prosecution or at least it has provided a sufficient

explanation by the appellant and for nothing else.

I find no reason to believe that the learned High Court Judge had predetermined

the matter. I am of the view that the learned High Court Judge was well

possessed of the relevant legal principles as to the proof of a charge against an

accused person in a criminal matter. He has well considered the evidence of the

prosecution to come to his finding that the evidence of the prosecution can be

accepted beyond reasonable doubt and hence the charge has been proved

against the appellant.

I have no reason to disagree with the determination of the learned High Court

Judge and find no merit in the considered grounds of appeal.

The appeal therefore is dismissed. The conviction and the sentence affirmed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal