1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIS REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under an in terms of the Section 331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Code. Director General Commission to investigate allegations of High Court of Colombo Bribery or Corruption Case No. B 40/2017 Colombo 7. COMPLAINANT Court of Appeal Vs. Case No. HCC 183/19

1. IrugalBandaralageNishantha Pradeep Bandara

ACCUSED AND NOW BETWEEN

1. IrugalBandaralageNishantha Pradeep Bandara

ACCUSED APPELLANT Vs. Director General Commission to investigate allegations of Bribery or Corruption Colombo 7. RESPONDENT Before: MenakaWijesundera, J. Neil Iddawala, J. Counsel: Nalin Ladduwahetty, P.C. with KavithriUbeysekera and RajithSamarasekea for the Accused-Appellant

Dilan Ratnayake, SDSG for the Respondent

Decided on: 01.09.2022

2

MenakaWijesundera, J. Accused-Appellant is produced in Court via zoom platform by the Prison Authorities. The learned Presidents Counsel appearing for the Accused-Appellant making his

submissions,and while drawing our attention to certain factors in the evidence and the law

pertaining to the same he pleaded that if the sentence is varied and reduced that he is not

contesting the conviction, mainly because the father of the appellant is almost dying and is very

anxious to see the appellant before his death.

The learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General appearing for the respondents urged that he can

always support the conviction and the sentence but in view of the humanitarian grounds urged

by the Counsel for the appellant that he will not be a Shylock (in his own words) but would

concede for a reduction in the sentence to run concurrently.

As such upon consideration of submissions of both parties and on the agreement of both

appearing for the Appellant and the Respondents, the conviction of the learned High Court

Judge is affirmed but the sentence is varied as follows.

The sentence of charges 11 and 12 are reduced from 5 years each to 4 years each, and the

sentences are to run concurrently, and the date of sentence to operate from 18.07.2019. The

rest of the sentence remains the same including the fine and the default sentence if any.

Subject to the above variation the appeal is dismissed.

The learned Presidents Counsel makes an application for this order to be conveyed to the

Welikada Prisons by way of fax. The Registrar is ordered to do so and the Appellant is to bear

the cost.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Neil Iddawala, J. I agree. JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Mm/