T

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRAIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

In the matter of an appeal in terms of Article 138 read

together with Article 154P of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Court of Appeal case no. CAlPHC/11/2017

H.C. Colombo case no. 873/05

M.C. Colombo case no. 77648/08

Police Station, Kurunduwatta.

Complainant

Vs.

Hewapathiranage Don Cletus Samaranayake

Accused

Muthuthanthrige Peatro Sunil Bernard

Fernando for Indra Finance Company Ltd.

Applicant Absolute Owner

NOW

Muthuthanthrige Peatro Sunil Bernard

Fernando for Indra Finance Company Ltd.

Applicant Absolute Owner Petitioner.

Vs.

Hewapathiranage Don Cletus Samaranayake

Accused Respondent

AND NOW

If{f

,

Before

Counsel

Muthuthanthrige Peatro Sunil Bernard

Fernando for Indra Finance Company Ltd.

Applicant Absolute Owner Petitioner

Appellant.

Vs.

Hewapathiranage Don Cletus Samaranayake

Accused Respondent Respondent.

: H.C.J. Madawala J.

: L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

: Sunil Abeyrathne with Thashisa Gunathilake for the

Applicant Absolute Owner Petitioner Appellant.

: Respondent is absent and unrepresented.

Argued on : 13.01.2017

Written submissions filed on : 06.02.2017

Decided on : 20.02.2017

L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

The dispute is on the entitlement to posses the vehicle bearing the

registered No. WP HF 3617 between the registered owner and the absolute

owner. It is an admitted fact that the vehicle was on a lease agreement and

the Appellant is the absolute owner and the Respondent is the registered

owner. Further the facts that the Respondent has failed to pay the monthly

rentals, thereafter the Appellant issued notice and canceled the agreement,

the possession of the vehicle was obtained by the Appellant through a

person who was given the written authority by the Appellant to obtain the

possession on behalf of the Appellant after making a complaint to the police

are not challenged. While the vehicle was taking away to the Appellant's

I I

j I i

premises, the Respondent re possessed the vehicle forcibly. It was also not

challenged.

At the vehicle inquiry, both parties, i.e. the registered owner and the

absolute owner claimed the vehicle. The learned Magistrate satisfied on all

the facts stated above but did not release the vehicle to the Appellant on the

basis that the Appellant was not a registered finance leasing company under

the Finance Leasing Act. The learned High Court Judge, on appeal, decided

that since the vehicle has been produced by the registered owner, Court has

to return it to the person from whom it was produced.

The Respondent submitted that the operation of the Gazette

Extraordinary No. 1196/27 dated 10.08.2001 where the registration of the

finance leasing companies has been regulated was suspended by the Court

of Appeal in the case No. 1304/2002 and the registration under the Finance

Leasing Act was not possible until 08.09.2005. The incident took place on

2l.02.2005.

The Finance Leasing Act has provided a mechanism for the absolute

owner to re possess a vehicle in case of nonpayment of the monthly

installments. The absolute owner followed the procedure and re possessed

the vehicle from the registered owner. While the vehicle was in the legal

custody of the absolute owner, the Respondent forcibly taken the vehicle

back. Therefore it cannot be said that the vehicle is not involved in a crime,

the vehicle is the subject matter of the crime.

The Legislature in its wisdom enacted the law giving a right to the

absolute owner to obtain possession of a vehicle subject to a finance leasing.

The section 433A Criminal Procedure Code was brought in by the

Amendment Act No. 12 of 1990 which reads thus;

433A.

(l)Jn the case of a vehicle let under a hire purchase or leasing

agreement, the person registered as the absolute owner of such

vehicle under the Motor Traffic Act (Chapter 203) shall be deemed

to be the person entitled to possession of such vehicle for the

purpose of this Chapter.

The vehicle involved in this case is under a finance leasing agreement

and therefore the Appellant, as the absolute owner, is the person deemed to

be entitle to possession of the vehicle.

The learned Magistrate's finding that the appellant was not registered

under Finance Leasing Act cannot have an impact on this case because there

was no possibility to register since the operation of the Gazette has been

suspended. That fact was not brought to the notice of the learned Magistrate.

The vehicle was in the possession of the Respondent as result of a

crime. Therefore the Court has to inquire in to the matter and release the

vehicle to the person who is entitle to it. The finding of the learned High

Court Judge that the Court needs not to involve in the dispute of the

registered owner and the absolute owner is not tenable in law.

Under these circumstances I allow the appeal and set aside the order

of the learned High Court Judge dated 08.03.2007 and the order of the

learned Magistrate dated 17.06.2005.

I order to release the vehicle to the Appellant

I order no costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

H.C.J. Madawala J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal