==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/PHC/0043/2019

Page 1 of 16

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal against the Order made by the Provincial High Court of the Sabaragamuwa Province holden at Kegalle in the application in revision bearing No.4249/ ප්‍රති.

Udapola Dasanayakalage Reginold Dasanayaka, Sumanagiri Building. Dehiowita Road Deraniyagala.

Petitioner Vs.

1. Anhettigama Gamaralalage

Dharmawardena, "Latha Sevana", Anhettigama, Deraniyagala. 2. Hingurahena Gamaralalage Amila

Wasantha Wijeysiri, Dodawaththa, Nuriya.

Respondents AND BETWEEN

Udapola Dasanayakalage Reginold Dasanayaka, Sumanagiri Building. Dehiowita Road Deraniyagala. Petitioner-Petitioner Vs.

Court of Appeal Case No: CA(PHC)0043/2019 High Court of Kegalle Case No: 4249/ ප්‍රති Magistrate Court of Ruwanwalla Case No: 17206/66

CA/PHC/0043/2019

Page 2 of 16

1. Anhettigama Gamaralalage

Dharmawardena, "Latha Sevana", Anhettigama, Deraniyagala. 2. Hingurahena Gamaralalage Amila

Wasantha Wijeysiri, Dodawaththa, Nuriya.

Respondents-Respondents AND NOW BETWEEN

Udapola Dasanayakalage Reginold Dasanayaka, Sumanagiri Building. Dehiowita Road Deraniyagala.

Petitioner-Petitioner-Appellant

Vs.

1. Anhettigama Gamaralalage

Dharmawardena, "Latha Sevana", Anhettigama, Deraniyagala. 2. Hingurahena Gamaralalage Amila

Wasantha Wijeysiri, Dodawaththa, Nuriya. Respondents-Respondents-Respondents

CA/PHC/0043/2019

Page 3 of 16

Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J. K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J. Counsel : Hussain Ahamed with Ms. Ayendri De Silva on the instructions of I. D. Ranjith Wijesinghe for the Petitioner-Petitioner-Appellant. Chamara Wannisekara with Isuri Cooray instructed by Dineth Baduwalage for the 1st and 2nd Respondent-Respondent-Respondents. Argued on : 18.07.2025 Written Submissions of the Petitioner-Petitioner -Appellant tendered on : 10.03.2025 Written Submissions of the Respondents -Respondents-Respondents tendered on : 13.02.2024 Decided on : 12.12.2025 K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Instant appeal arises from an order dated 07.02.2019 made by the learned

High Court Judge of the Sabaragamuwa Province holden at Kegalle (hereinafter

called and referred to as the order) in an application in revision bearing No.

4249/ ප්‍රති, preferred to it by the Petitioner-Petitioner-Appellant (hereinafter

called and referred to as the Appellant) against an order dated 18.10.2011

made by the learned Magistrate of Ruwanwalla (hereinafter called and referred

to as the learned Magistrate) in the proceedings initiated before it by the

CA/PHC/0043/2019

Page 4 of 16

Appellant by filing information thereat under and in terms of section 66(1)(b) of

the Primary Courts Procedure Act No. 44 of 1979 (hereinafter called and

referred to as the Act) against the 1st and 2nd Respondent-Respondent-

Respondents (hereinafter called and referred to as the 1st and 2nd Respondents)

whereby, the learned Magistrate had having held that the Appellant had not

established to the satisfaction of the Court that he had been in possession of

the whole of the building, namely; the premises bearing assessment No. 5

situated in a land which is 36 yards in length and 7 yards in breadth in extent

as morefully, described in the schedule to the original affidavit of the Petitioner

filed in the Magistrate’s Court of Ruwanwella under section 66(1)(b) of the Act

and therefore, he had not established to the satisfaction of the Court that the

1st and 2nd Respondents had having boarded up and fenced off a portion of the

ground floor of the said premises (hereinafter called and referred to as the

premises in dispute) dispossessed the Petitioner therefrom on 03.02.2010 but,

the 1st and 2nd Respondents had established through the documents submitted

to Court that they too, had having taken-over the possession of the premises in

dispute, been in possession thereof, determined that the 1st and 2nd

Respondents had been in possession thereof and made order prohibiting the

Appellant from all disturbance of such possession.

As can be gathered from the record, the facts enumerated below are

uncontroverted and admitted facts in the instant action instituted by the

Appellant in the Magistrate Court of Ruwanwalla; namely;

a) the premises in dispute is a portion of a building bearing assessment

No.05 which is alleged to have been boarded up and separated off by the

1st and 2nd Respondents, and which is standing on the land morefully

described in the schedule to the affidavit filed by the Appellant in the

Magistrate Court of Ruwanwalla dated 23.02.2010 furnishing

information thereto under in terms of section 66(1)(b) of the Act, as well

as in the schedule to the further affidavit of the Appellant and the joint

CA/PHC/0043/2019

Page 5 of 16

counter affidavits of the 1st and 2nd Respondents filled in the Magistrate

Court of Ruwanwalla;

b) the complaints dated 03.02.2010 and 24.03.2010 had been made to

the Police by the Appellants while, the complaint dated 12.08.1999 had

been made to the Police by the 1st Respondent;

c) the land in which the premises in dispute is situated, is a co-owned

land and A. G. Punchimahathmaya, U.D.U. Dassanyaka, H. A. V.

Heenmanike, Kamalawathie Dassanayaka, Gunarathne Manike

Dassanayaka, Karunawathie Dassanayaka, U.D. Pushpalatha,

Gaminilatha Dassanayaka, and Gamlath manike had been co-owners

thereof, as admitted by the Appellant as well as the 1st and 2nd

Respondents and as also, manifest from the document dated 14.02.1985

which was annexed to the further affidavit of the Appellant marked as

‘පෙ1/X6’ and also from the complaints dated 03.02.2010 and

24.03.2010 made to the Police by the Appellants and also the complaint

made to the Police by the 1st Respondent dated 12.08.1999;

c) both the Appellant as well as the 1st Respondent too, had been co-

owners thereof, respectively, by virtue of the deed of gift bearing No. 396

(පෙ2/X7) and the deed of transfer bearing No. 372 (ව2/X37);

d) two partition actions bearing Nos. 17455 and 20084P, had been

instituted in the District Court of Avissawella seeking partition of the

land and the building standing thereon including the premises in dispute

–the subject matter of the Magistrate Court of Ruwanwalla as morefully

described above with the latter being instituted in the year 2010 by the

1st Respondent himself to the Magistrate Court action who is 1st

Respondent to the instant appeal too.

Let me now, briefly, set out the facts and circumstances relevant and material

to the instant appeal as follows;

CA/PHC/0043/2019

Page 6 of 16

The Appellant had furnished information under section 66(1) (b) of the Act to

the Magistrate Court of Ruwanwalla alleging that he had forcibly, been

dispossessed by the 1st and 2nd Respondents on 03.02.2010 from the

possession of the premises in dispute in the instant action.

On the other hand, the 1st and 2nd Respondents had while vehemently, denying

the allegation so levelled against them by the Appellant, taken up a position in

their joint counter affidavit (X34) that they being co-owners of the premises in

dispute, had been in continuous possession thereof.

However, the learned Magistrate of Ruwanwalla in her order dated 18.10.2011,

had having held that the Appellant had not established to the satisfaction of

the Court that he had been in possession of the whole of the building, namely;

the premises bearing assessment No. 5 situated in a land which is 36 yards in

length and 7 yards in breadth in extent as morefully, described in the schedule

to the original affidavit of the Petitioner filed in the Magistrate’s Court of

Ruwanwella under section 66(1)(b) of the Act and therefore, he had not

established to the satisfaction of the Court that the 1st and 2nd Respondents

had having boarded up and fenced off a portion of the ground floor of the said

premises dispossessed the Petitioner therefrom on 03.02.2010 but, the 1st and

2nd Respondents had established through the documents submitted to Court

that they too, had having taken-over the possession of the premises in dispute,

been in possession thereof, determined that the 1st and 2nd Respondents had

been in possession thereof and made order prohibiting the Appellant from all

disturbance of such possession.

It is this order of the learned Magistrate of Ruwanwalla, that the Appellant had

in his application in revision filed before the High Court of the Sabaragamuwa

Province holden at Kegalle (hereinafter called and referred to as the High Court

of the Province) sought to revise and set aside.

The learned High Court Judge of Kegalle had in the order, proceeded to find

that the Court of first instance had held that the Petitioner had not proved to

CA/PHC/0043/2019

Page 7 of 16

the satisfaction of the Court that he had occupied the entire building and

premises in question and that according to the document marked X6 or P1

produced in connection with the taking over of the possession of the building

and premises in question, the two-storey building was handed over to nine

persons at the time of taking over the possession and that the same document

had been marked as ව18 by the Respondents and that it is the position of the

Respondents that the name mentioned in it as Punchi Appuhamy is the father

of the 1st Respondent and this has not been challenged and controverted and

that accordingly, it did not reveal that when possession of the building and

premises in question was handed over, it had not been handed over only to one

person by the Deraniyagala-Panawala Multipurpose Cooperative Society

Limited and that even though, the Petitioner claims that the possession of the

entire building and premises in question had been obtained by him by the

letter X6, it had been contradicted by the document submitted by the Petitioner

himself and that the Petitioner had become entitled to an undivided ½ share of

the entire building and premises in question by virtue of the deed of gift-X7,

but none of the documents submitted by the Petitioner reveals that he had

acquired the possession of the entire building and premises in question, which

had been duly, found by the Court of first instance and that even if the relevant

documents submitted in relation to the electoral register were either accepted

or rejected, they do not lend any support to prove the assertion that he had

complete possession of the building and premises in question and that while

the Petitioner had failed to satisfy Court that the entire building and premises

in question had been possessed by him, however, according to his own

position, adverted to by him, the Respondents had been possessing a part of

the building in question even at the time of the information being forwarded to

Court by him and that the Petitioner had failed to adduce sufficient evidence to

establish that he had been dispossessed from the premises in dispute by the

1st and 2nd Respondents illegally, on 03.02.2010 and that the Petitioner in this

case had not proved when and how the possession of the land and premises in

CA/PHC/0043/2019

Page 8 of 16

question that had been taken over by the father of the 1st Respondent-Punchi

Mahathmaya, by ව19(X53) had been lost and that accordingly, there has been

no error in law in the findings of the Court of first instance reached by it under

Section 68(3) of the Act that the Respondents had been occupying a part of the

premises in dispute and that it becomes clear that a partition action had

already, been filed in Court by the parties in order to settle the dispute between

them.

The learned High Court Judge of Kegalle had having found so, proceeded to

dismiss the application in revision. The reasons adduced therefor being the

availability of an alternative remedy which the parties had already availed

themselves of it, namely; institution of a partition action and that the order

sought to be revised and set aside, is not one which is palpably, wrong and

therefore, is not one which is illegal; or is not one which would tend to shock

the conscience of the Court; or is not one which would tend to cause a

miscarriage of justice. It is this order that the Appellant now, seeks to canvas

before us in the instant appeal.

The extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction was exclusively, vested with the

Court of Appeal before the enactment of the 13th Amendment to the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. However, after

the enactment of the 13th Amendment to the Constitution, the revisionary

jurisdiction is now, vested with the High Court of the Province concurrently,

with the Court of Appeal.

After an exhaustive analysis of all the authorities on this, it was held in

Rustom vs. Hapangama & Company (1978-79) 2 SLR 225, that “the powers

by way of revision conferred on the Appellate Court are wide and can be

exercised whether an appeal has been taken against an order of the original

Court or not. However, such powers would be exercised only in exceptional

circumstances where an appeal lay and as to what such exceptional

circumstances are dependent on the facts of each case”. [emphasis is mine]

CA/PHC/0043/2019

Page 9 of 16

Court in Rustom vs. Hapangama & Co (Supra) further observed in the

following manner; “The trend of authority clearly, indicates that where the

revisionary powers of the Court of Appeal are invoked, the practice has been

that these powers will be exercised if there is an alternative remedy available,

only if the existence of special circumstances are urged necessitating the

indulgence of this Court to exercise its powers in revision.”

It was further observed by Court in the decision in Rustom Vs. Hapangama &

Company(Supra) that, “This Court has the power to act in revision even

though the appeal is available, in appropriate cases. The question which has

now to be decided is whether the instant case is an appropriate case in which

we should exercise our discretionary powers of revision. In his petition and

affidavit the petitioner has not set out the reasons for his seeking this method

of rectification of the order rather than the ordinary method of appeal. Nor has

he set out any exceptional circumstances as to why we should grant him the

indulgence of exercising our revisionary powers when he could have appealed

against the order with leave”.

It was held by Court in Dharmaratne and Another Vs. Palm Paradise

Cabanas Ltd and Others 2003 (3) SLR 24 at page 30 that “Thus, the

existence of exceptional circumstances is the process by which the Court

selects the cases in respect of which this extra-ordinary method of rectification

should be adopted. If such a selection process is not there, revisionary

jurisdiction of this Court will become a gateway for every litigant to make a

second appeal in the grab of a revision application or to make an appeal in

situations where the legislature has not given right of appeal. The practice of

Court to insist on the existence of exceptional circumstances for the exercise of

revisionary powers has taken deep root in our law and has got hardened into a

CA/PHC/0043/2019

Page 10 of 16

rule which should not be lightly disturbed. The words used by the legislature

do not indicate that it ever intended to interfere with this ‘rule of practice’.”

It was held in Urban Development Authority vs. Ceylon Entertainments

Ltd. and another reported in 2002 [B.L.R] at page 66 that “the petitioner who

invokes the revisionary jurisdiction of this Court should expressly set out the

exceptional circumstances and an express pleading to that effect is a sine quo

non, for this Court to consider the relief claimed by the petitioner. In the

absence of an express plea, this Court would be precluded from considering the

relief claimed in the application”.

Let me now, quote a passage from the decision in Perera v. Muthalib 45 NLR

412 “I would invite attention to the observations made by Wood-Renton J. in

the King v. Nordeen. He said; I do not think that that power (i.e. , revisionary

power) is at all limited to those cases in which either no appeal lies or for some

reason or other an appeal has not been taken”, but he went on to add that this

power would be exercised only when a strong case is made out “amounting to a

positive miscarriage of justice in regard to either the law, or the judge’s

appreciation of the facts. In the case I am dealing with I should have felt

compelled to give relief solely on the ground that what may well be said to be a

failure of justice has been brought to the notice of this Court, and technical

rules must make way for the granting of redress in such a case. There has been

a violation of the fundamental rule of judicial procedure that a person sought

to be affected by an order shall first be heard. But, in this instance there is yet

another ground upon which this application for revision ought to be exercised

and that is that the petitioner had no knowledge of the order made against him

till the time for preferring an appeal had elapsed.”

In the case of Attorney-General v. Podi Singho 51 NLR 385 it was held that

“even though the revisionary powers should not be exercised in cases when

there is an appeal and was not taken, the revisionary powers should be

exercised only in exceptional circumstances such as (a) miscarriage of justice

CA/PHC/0043/2019

Page 11 of 16

(b) where a strong case for interference by the Supreme Court is made out or (c)

where the applicant was unaware of the order.” Court also observes that “the

Supreme Court in exercising its powers of revision is not hampered by

technical rules of pleading and procedure.”

See also; Hotel Galaxy (Pvt) Ltd Vs. Mercantile Hotels Management Ltd.

1978 (1) SLR 05, Janita Vs. Abeysekara (Sri skantha Law Report Vol iv

Page 22), and Thilagaratnam Vs. Edirisinghe 1982 (1) SLR 56.

In the light of the principle laid down by Court in the aforesaid decisions, an

Appellate Court can exercise its revisionary jurisdiction conferred on the

Appellate Court only and only, in exceptional circumstances, where an

alternative remedy lay. [emphasis is mine]

Section 67(1) and (2) of the Act enacts thus;

“(1) Every inquiry under this Part shall be held in a summary manner

and shall be concluded within three months of the commencement of the

inquiry.

(2) The Judge of the Primary Court shall deliver his order within one

week of the conclusion of the inquiry.”

Section 68(2) of the Act enacts thus;

“(2) An order under subsection (1) shall declare any one or more persons

therein specified to be entitled to the possession of the land or the part in

the manner specified in such order until such person or persons are

evicted therefrom under an order or decree of a competent court,

and prohibit all disturbance of such possession otherwise than

under the authority of such an order or decree.” [Emphasis is mine]

CA/PHC/0043/2019

Page 12 of 16

Section 69(2) of the Act enacts thus;

“(2) An order under this subsection may declare that any person

specified therein shall be entitled to any such right in or respecting the

land or in any part of the land as may be specified in the order until

such person is deprived of such right by virtue of an order or decree

of a competent court, and prohibit all disturbance or interference

with the exercise of such right by such party other than under the

authority of an order or decree as aforesaid.” [Emphasis is mine]

Section 74(1) and (2) of the Act enacts thus;

“(1) An order under this Part shall not affect or prejudice any right or

interest in any land or part of a land which any person may be able to

establish in a civil suit; and it shall be the duty of a Judge of a Primary

Court who commences to hold an inquiry under this Part to explain the

effect of these sections to the persons concerned in the dispute.

(2) An appeal shall not lie against any determination or order under this

Part.”

This Court observed in Mansoor and Another V. O.I.C. Avissawella Police &

Another [1991] 2 SLR 75 that, “In terms of section 67(1) an inquiry under this

Part has to be held in a “summary manner” and has to be concluded within

three months of the commencement of the inquiry. Section 74(2) provides that

an appeal will not lie against any determination or order under this Part. It

appears from section 74(1) that the remedy available to a person affected

by an order after such a summary inquiry is to establish his right or

interest to the land in a civil suit. A Judge of the Primary Court is

specially required to explain the effect of this provision to the persons

concerned in the dispute. Therefore, according to the legislative schemes

an order made by the Primary Court in a proceeding under Part VII will be

operative only till the dispute affecting land is finally resolved on a “civil

CA/PHC/0043/2019

Page 13 of 16

suit”. The phrase “civil suit” is clearly referable to an action filed in a

regular Court exercising civil jurisdiction. [Emphasis is mine]

It was held in Punchi Nona v. Padumasena and Others 1994 [2] SLR 117 at

page 122 that, “The jurisdiction conferred on a Primary Court under section 66

is a special jurisdiction. It is quasi-criminal jurisdiction. The primary object

of the jurisdiction so conferred is the prevention of a breach of the peace

arising in respect of a dispute affecting land. The Court in exercising this

jurisdiction is not involved in an investigation into title or the right to

possession which is the function of a civil Court.” [Emphasis is mine]

Hence, it is manifest that the primary object of the jurisdiction so conferred is

the prevention of a breach of the peace arising in respect of a dispute affecting

land and that the Court in exercising this jurisdiction is not involved in an

investigation into title or the right to possession which is the function of a civil

Court and that hence, the remedy available to a person affected by an order

after such a summary inquiry held in the proceedings under part VII of the Act,

is to establish his right or interest to the land in a civil suit and that a Judge of

the Primary Court is specially required to explain the legal effect of those

provisions quoted above, to the persons concerned in the dispute and

therefore, according to the legislative scheme, an order made by the Primary

Court in a proceeding under Part VII will be operative only till the dispute

affecting land is finally resolved on a “civil suit”. The phrase “civil suit” is

clearly referable to an action filed in a regular Court exercising civil

jurisdiction.

It is an admitted fact in the instant action that, two partition actions bearing

Nos. 17455 and 20084P, had been instituted in the District Court of

Avissawella seeking partition of the land and the premises standing thereon

including the premises in dispute–the subject matter of the Magistrate Court of

Ruwanwalla as morefully described above with the latter being instituted in the

year 2010 by the 1st Respondent himself to the Magistrate Court action (who is

CA/PHC/0043/2019

Page 14 of 16

1st Respondent to the instant appeal too), being plaintiff thereto, and the

Appellant to the instant appeal being the 1st defendant thereto, which is

according to the pleadings filed in the Magistrate Court of Ruwanwalla in the

said proceedings under part VII of the Act, still pending and the partition

action bearing No. 17455/බෙදුම් in which the Appellant in the instant appeal

being the 25th defendant, appears to have come to an end by the entering the

final partition decree by Court as manifest from the amended interlocutory

decree filed in that case a copy of which was annexed to his counter affidavit

filed by the Appellant in the Magistrate Court of Ruwanwalla marked as බෙ15

(X21) and also from the final partition plan and the scheme of share

distribution a copy of which was annexed to his counter affidavit filed by the

Appellant in the Magistrate Court of Ruwanwalla marked as බෙ16 (X22).

Hence, it clearly, appears that the rights of the parties in relation to the land

and premises including the premises in dispute had already, been finally, and

conclusively, adjudicated upon and determined by the District Court of

Avissawella in the said partition action bearing No. 17455/බෙදුම් and that the

rights of the parties in relation to the dispute between them in the proceedings

before the Magistrate Court of Ruwanwalla taken under part VII of the Act

affecting the premises in dispute too, is yet to be adjudicated upon and

determined by the District Court of Avissawella in the said partition case

bearing No. 20084P.

It thus, clearly, appears that, the parties affected by the order of the learned

Magistrate of Ruwanwalla after such a summary inquiry held in the

proceedings under part VII of the Act, had already, availed themselves of the

lawful remedy available to them in law and therefore, the necessity does not in

any manner, arise for the Appellant to have adopted this extra-ordinary method

of rectification as rightly, held by the learned High Court Judge of Kegalle.

CA/PHC/0043/2019

Page 15 of 16

Hence, I would hold that the application in revision filed by the Appellant in the

High Court of the Province seeking to revise and set aside the order of the

learned Magistrate of Ruwanwalla, cannot in any manner, sustain both in fact

and law and as such it ought to have been dismissed on this ground alone, by

Court as rightly, done by the learned High Court Judge of Kegalle.

On the other hand, I would see no reason why this Court or the High Court of

the Province should interfere with the order of the learned Magistrate of

Ruwanwalla for; the learned Magistrate had come to such findings as arrived at

by her in the order on the material available on record which clearly, and

unequivocally, establishes that the Appellant as well as the Respondents had

been co-owners of the land and premises including the premises in dispute and

that possession of the entirety of the land and premises including the premises

in dispute had been handed over by the Daranigala Co-operative Society

Limited to nine persons including the predecessors in title of both the

Appellants as well as the Respondents but, however, there had been an iota of

evidence on record to show as to how and when the Respondents had lost the

possession thereof, into which their predecessors had admittedly, been let.

In the circumstances, I would see no error in the order of the learned

Magistrate of Ruwanwalla which would tend to shock the conscience of the

Court or which would tend to occasion a grave miscarriage of justice to any

party to the proceedings before the Magistrate Court of Ruwanwalla warranting

the High Court of the Province to exercise its extra-ordinary revisionary

jurisdiction in revision of the order of the learned Magistrate of Ruwanwalla as

rightly, held by the learned High Court Judge of Kegalle.

Besides, the parties to the proceedings before the Magistrate Court of

Ruwanwalla had already, availed themselves of the proper remedy available to

them in law in respect of the premises in dispute as enumerated above.

CA/PHC/0043/2019

Page 16 of 16

In the circumstances, it clearly, appears that, the Appellant had not shown in

his application in revision filed before the High Court of the Province any

exceptional circumstances warranting the High Court of the Province to

exercise its extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction vested in it to revise and set

aside the order of the learned Magistrate of Ruwanwalla for; an Appellate

Court can exercise its revisionary jurisdiction conferred on it only and

only, in exceptional circumstances, where an alternative remedy lay.

[Emphasis is mine]

In view of the above, I would hold that the appeal is not entitled to succeed

both in fact and law.

In the result, I would dismiss the appeal with costs of this Court and below.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL