IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

D.C. Kegalle Case No. 25397/P

Jayasinghe Wasamge Ariyasena of Arambe, Beligodapitiya, Rambukkana.

Plaintiff

Vs.

1. Jayasinghe Wasamge Ariyawathie

C/O 1. W. V. Ariyasena of Arambe, Beeligodapitiya, Rambukkana.

2. Tennakoon Mudiyanselage Tikiri Banda of Beraluwa, Godagadeniya, Rambukkana.

3. N. M. Podinilame ofl\1edagoda, Rambukkana.

Defendants

AND NOW

Anura Nawarathne, Medagoda, Rambukkana.

Substituted 3rd Defendant - Appellant

Vs.

1

2

layasinghe Wasamge Ariyasena of Arambe, Beligodapitiya, Rambukkana.

Plaintiff - Respondent

Jayasinghe Wasamge Ariyawathie CIO J. W. V. Ariyasena of Argmbe, Beeligodapitiya, Rambukkana.

1 st Defendant - Respondent

T. M. Podimenike, No. 577 IS, Rammuthugala, Kadawatha.

Substituted 2nd Defendant Respondent

BEFORE: M.M.A. GAFFOOR J

S. DEVIKA DE LIVERA TENNEKOON J

COUNSEL: Nihal Jayawardena PC with D. Abeygunawardana for the Defendnat Appellant

Dushan Nagahena for the Plaintiff Respondent

ARGUED ON: 28.02.2017

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS -Filed by both parties

\ I

\

l

!

3

DECIDED ON: 29.09.2017

s. DEVIKA DE LIVERA TENNEKOON J

The Plaintiff - Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the Respondent) instituted

action in the District Court of Kegalle to partition the land described in the

schedule in the Plaint dated 03.12.1990 between the Plaintiff and the 1st and 2nd

Defendants in equal shares.

The 3rd Defendant - Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant) filed his

statement of claim dated 03.09.1992 and claimed that Lot 1 and Lot 2 depicted in

preliminary plan prepared by licensed surveyor G. A. R. Perera licensed surveyor

bearing No. 1026 dated 06.01.1992 does not form part of the corpus, namely

"Ingulana Hena" but formed part of the land known as "Kurukappetiye Hena"

owned by the Appellant. The Appellant set out a pedigree in his statement of claim

tracing title to him and further claimed prescriptive rights over the said lots which

he claimed ought to be excluded from the partition action.

Trial commenced on 24.01.1994 and issue Nos. 01 - 04 were raised on behalf of

the Respondent and issue Nos. 05 -13 were raised by the Appellant while no

admissions were recorded.

Upon evidence been led by both parties the learned District Court Judge

pronounced judgment dated 15.09.1997 in favour of the Plaintiff and allotted

shares to the Plaintiff and the 1 st and 2nd Defendant as prayed for in the Plaint.

4

Being aggrieved by the said judgment the Appellant preferred the instant Appeal

by Petition of Appeal dated 09.10.1997 on the grounds mainly that;

a) Where the Court has held that some of the boundaries do not tally exactly

into Lots 1 & 2 in the said plan the claim of prescription of the Appellant

ought to have been considered,

b) A part of the Plaintiff's pedigree has been accepted contrary to law.

In essence this Court finds that the matter to be dealt with in these proceedings are

whether the Appellant has acquired title to the said Lots marked 1 & 2 by the

pedigree set out in the statement of claim of the Appellant or by way of

prescription and if so whether Lots 1 & 2 ought to be excluded from the corpus.

At the outset it is pertinent to examine the extent of land which is the subject of

this partition action. As per the Plaint dated 03.12.1990 the land sought to be

partitioned called "Ingulana Hena" is in extent of 2 pela, which translates to

approximately 5 roods. The title deeds submitted by the Respondent also refer to

the corpus as being 2 pela. The schedule contained in the statement of claim of the

Appellant in which he claims ownership to the said Lots 1 & 2 refer to the extent

as 2 pela. The title deeds submitted by the Appellant also refer to "Kurukappetiye

Hena" as being 2 pela.

,l Ii !!

5

However, the preliminary plan bearing No.1 026 dated 06.01.1992 prepared by the

Court Commissioner G.A.R. Perera licensed surveyor indicates that the land

surveyed is in extent 2 Acres, 1 Rood, 10.1 Perches (approximaelty 4 pela).

Therefore it seems that nearly double the extent of what is being claimed by the

Respondent has now become the subject matter of the partition action.

In the case of Rathnayake & others V s. Kumarihami & others 2002 (1) SLR 65 it

was held by Weerasuriya, J inter alia;

"The system of land measure computed according to the extent of land

required to sow with paddy or kurakkan vary due to the interaction of

several factors. The amount of seed required could vary according to the

varying degrees of the soil, the size and quality of the grain, and the peculiar

qualities of the sower. In the circumstances it is difficult to correlate sowing

extent accurately by reference to surface areas."

Although, the said system of land measurement is not as accurate as the system of

measurement computed using precision instruments, it is an accepted form of land

measurement which has been used in Sri Lanka since ancient times. It is agreed

that several factors could affect the accuracy of measurement using this system but

in relation to lands which are adjacent to one another or situated in the same area,

the room for such variation is minimalized considering that the factors which affect

the measurement would more or less be the same.

In the instant case both the Appellant and Respondent claim title to land in extent 2

pela. The Appellant contends that "Kurukappetiye Hena" which belongs to him has

6

been wrongly included as "Ingulana Hena" which is the subject of the partition

action which is now before this Court. In view of the fact that the preliminary plan

bearing No.1 026 dated 06.01.1992 describes the corpus more than double of what

has been claimed by the Plaintiff, this Court finds that there is some merit to the

claim of the Appellant.

It is unfortunate however that the Appellant has failed to present his case with due

diligence before the learned Trial Judge resulting in a decision against him. It is

evident that even at the time of surveying the said land, as per the surveyor report,

the Appellant is said to have been in possession of Lots 1 & 2. Further, the

Appellant has constructed a building on Lot 2 without any objection from the

Respondents. However, as correctly contended by the Respondent the Appellant

has stated in cross examination that Lot 1 was possessed by the 2nd Defendant -

Respondent. This view is contrary to the position of the Appellant.

On the other hand the Respondent has stated in cross examination (vide page 67 of

the Appeal brief) that Lots 1 & 2 were owned by the Respondent and Appellant in

common.

Therefore, it is evident that both the Appellant and Respondent have contradicted

their respective positions in evidence.

In these circumstances this Court agrees with the submission made by the learned

Counsel for the Appellant who relies on the case of Jayasuriya Vs. Ubaid 61 NLR

352 in which it was held that;

I!

~

~ I i

t

~ f (

(

t i IiI

II

iI

t I

\

7

'In a partition action there is a duty cast on the Judge to satisfy him as to

the identity of the land sought to be partitioned, and for this purpose it is

always open to him to call for further evidence (in a regular manner) order to

make a proper investigation. '

For the reasons mentioned above we set aside the judgment of the learned District

Judge dated 15.09.1997 and order trial de novo.

Considering the time exhausted on the matter in dispute the learned District Judge

is directed to hear this matter expeditiously giving priority to this case.

Appeal Allowed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

M.M.A. GAFFOOR J

I Agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal