Page 1 of 7

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

In the matter of an application in terms of Article 154(P)(6) read with Article 138 of the Constitution of Sri Lanka. IN THE MAGISTRATES COURT 1. Hissalla Kankanamge Wimalsena

No.524, Vaga (West), Thummodara, Hissalla 2. Padukka Vidhanalage Amarawathi,

No.524, Vaga (West), Thummodara

Petitioners Vs. 1. Kathriachchi Pinnawalage Sunil Padmasiri,

No.537/1, Vaga (West), Thummodara 2. Kathriachchi Pinnawalage Chaminda

Pushpakumara, No.537/3, Vaga (West), Thummodara

Respondents AND BETWEEN

1. Kathriachchi Pinnawalage Sunil Padmasiri,

No.537/1, Vaga (West), Thummodara 2. Kathriachchi Pinnawalage Chaminda

Pushpakumara, No.537/3, Vaga (West), Thummodara

Respondent-Petitioners VS 1. Hissalla Kankanamge Wimalsena

No.524, Vaga (West), Thummodara,

Court of Appeal Case No: CA (PHC) 212_2018 HCRA (Avissawella) No: 07_2017 MC Avissawella : 3364

Page 2 of 7

Hissalla 2. Padukka Vidhanalage Amarawathi,

No.524, Vaga (West), Thummodara

Petitioner-Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Kathriachchi Pinnawalage Sunil Padmasiri,

No.537/1, Vaga (West), Thummodara 2. Kathriachchi Pinnawalage Chaminda

Pushpakumara, No.537/3, Vaga (West), Thummodara Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

VS

1. Hissalla Kankanamge Wimalsena

No.524, Vaga (West), Thummodara, Hissalla 2. Padukka Vidhanalage Amarawathi,

No.524, Vaga (West), Thummodara Petitioner-Respondent-Respondents

Before: Prasantha De Silva, J.

K.K.A.V. Swarnadhipathi, J.

Counsel: Thanuka Nandasiri with Nuwan Beligahawatta and Manujaya De Silva for

the Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant.

J.M.Wijebandara with Chamodi Dayananda for the Petitioner-

Respondent-Respondents.

Page 3 of 7

Written submissions : 08.04.2022 by the Petitioner-Respondent-Respondents.

tendered on 04.05.2022 by the Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant.

Delivered on: 18.01.2023

Judgment

This is an appeal emanating from the Order dated 03.12.2018 made by the learned High

Court Judge exercising revisionary jurisdiction against the Order dated 28.08.2017

made by the learned Magistrate acting as the Primary Court Judge in terms of Primary

Courts Procedure Act No.44 of 1979.

It appears that the Petitioner instituted action against the Respondent in terms of

Section 66(1)(b) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act No. 44 of 1979 in the Magistrates

Court in case bearing No.3364 where the Petitioners had forcibly taken possession of a

part of Respondents land by erecting a fence and covering the part thereon.

The learned Magistrate after following the procedure stipulated in the Primary Courts

Procedure Act allowed parties to file affidavits, counter affidavits along with

documents and fixed the matter for inquiry. Upon the evidence placed before Court,

the learned Magistrate delivered the Order on 28.08.2017 and held that the Petitioner

is entitled to the possession of the disputed portion of land.

Being aggrieved by the said Order, Respondent-Petitioners had invoked the revisionary

jurisdiction of the Provincial High Court of the Western Province holden at Avissawella

in revision application bearing No. 07/2017. However, the learned High Court Judge

affirmed the Order of the learned Magistrate and dismissed the application of the

Respondent-Petitioner.

Being aggrieved by the said Order, the Respondent-Petitioner-Appellants has preferred

this appeal seeking to set aside the Order of the leaned High Court Judge dated

03.12.2018 and the Order of the learned Magistrate dated 28.08.2017.

Page 4 of 7

It was the contention of the Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant [ hereinafter referred to

as the Appellant] that the learned Magistrate and the learned High Court Judge had

failed to meet the fundamental objectives and requirements of Section 66 and 68 of

the Primary Courts Procedure Act No.44 of 1979.

It is observable that the impugned orders made by the learned Magistrate as well as the

learned High Court Judge in terms of section 66(1)(b) of the Primary Courts Procedure

Act are provisional orders in nature and made for the purpose of preserving public peace

in a dispute affecting land pending the final adjudication of the rights of parties by a

competent civil court.

Matters pertaining to Section 66 of the Primary Courts Procedure Act are not dealing

with an investigation into title of property in dispute or right to possession, which are

functions of a civil court. Therefore, it is apparent that the Legislature has introduced

Part VII of the Primary Courts Procedure Act No.44 of 1979 to prevent a breach of the

peace and not to embark on a protracted trial investigating the title of the disputed

land. Perusing Section 74(1) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act reflects the said

position.

Section 74(1) states:

An order under this Part shall not affect or prejudice any right or interest in any

land or part of a land which any person may be able to establish in a civil suit;

and it shall be the duty of a Judge of a Primary Court who commences to hold

an inquiry under this Part to explain the effect of these sections to the persons

concerned in the dispute.

It is interesting to note the case of Punchi Nona Vs. Padumasena and Others [1994]

2 SLR 117, where it was held that the Primary Court exercising special jurisdiction

under Section 66 of the Primary Courts Procedure Act is not involved in an investigation

into the title or the right to possession, which is the function of a civil court. What the

Primary Court is required to do is to take a preventive action and make a provisional

order pending final adjudication of rights of the parties in a civil court. It is to be

Page 5 of 7

observed that Section 66 of the Primary Courts Procedure Act has not granted the legal

competency to investigate and ascertain the ownership or title to the disputed rights

which is a function of the District Court.

The intention of the legislature in introducing Part VII of Primary Courts Procedure Act

No.44 of 1979 is to prevent a breach of the peace and not to embark on a protracted

trial investigating title when deciding the matter in dispute.

As such, it is imperative to note that if an aggrieved party wishes to establish his legal

rights to the disputed land, the competent civil jurisdiction has to be invoked. In view

of section 74(2) of the Act, no appeal is conferred against the Order of the Primary

Court. However, if there is a miscarriage of justice or any injustice caused to a party,

the aggrieved party is entitled to invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of the respective

Provincial High Court against the Order of the Primary Court and the aggrieved party is

entitled to prefer an appeal against the Order of the High Court to the Court of Appeal

by operation of law.

It appears that preferring an appeal to the Court of Appeal would not serve the purpose

or the intention of Legislature in enacting Part VII of the Primary Courts Procedure Act

No. 44 of 1979. As such, it is desirable for the aggrieved party to invoke the civil

jurisdiction of a competent court to have the civil rights of the disputed land

adjudicated.

In this respect, it is worthy to note the Judgement by Obeysekara, J. in the case

Aluthhewage Harshani Chandrika and others vs Officer in Charge and others [ CA

PHC 65/2003 C.A.M 21.09.2020] which held:

The Court of Appeal has to look into the matter whether the learned High Court

Judge has properly exercised his duty to ascertain any injustice caused to a party

or whether there is a miscarriage of justice occurred against the Order of the

Page 6 of 7

learned Magistrate and not that the Court of Appeal in empowered to correct

the errors made by the learned Magistrate.

It is relevant to note that in the instant case, the learned Magistrate has to determine

who was in possession of the disputed land two months prior to the date on which the

information was filed.

In the case of Krishnamoorthy Sivakumar Vs. Fathima Johara Packer [ CA PHC

122/2018 - C.A.M 27.09.2022], De Silva J observed that the Legislature intended to

conclude matters in the Primary Court within a 3-month time frame and not conferring

a right of appeal against the Order of the Primary Court is to discourage litigants from

filing cases on frivolous grounds devoid of merit.

Further it was held in Krishnamoorthy Sivakumar Vs. Fathima Johara Packer

[Supra]:

In actual sense the suitable step is to have civil rights of the relevant parties

adjudicated in the relevant competent civil court. Therefore, when filing an

appeal against a provisional order given under the Primary Courts Procedure

Act, the party concerned must come to a degree of certainty that their claim has

merit and is likely to succeed and thereupon decide on the appropriate platform

from which he can receive a fair remedy. It is incumbent upon the learned High

Court Judges to direct parties to a competent civil Court for a final adjudication

of their legal rights pertaining to the land in question. This will enable us to

witness an efficient administration of justice in our Court system.

Perusing the Order of the learned High Court Judge, it is seen that the learned High

Court Judge has analysed the evidence placed before the Magistrate and considered

the facts and law relating to the case at hand and had dismissed the revision application

made by the Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant. Thus, the learned High Court Judge has

come to the correct findings of fact and law.

Page 7 of 7

It is to be observed that the Appellant had not substantiated that there is a miscarriage

of justice or that any injustice was caused to the Appellant by the Orders of the learned

Magistrate and/or the learned High Court Judge. Thus, it is clear that no exceptional

circumstances exist for the Appellant to invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of the

Provincial High Court of the Western Province holden at Avissawella.

In view of the aforesaid reasons, we see no reason to interfere with the Order dated

03.12.2018 made by the learned High Court Judge.

Hence, the Appeal is dismissed with cost.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K.K.A.V. Swarnadhipathi, J. I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL