Page 1 of 10

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Court of Appeal Case No:

HCC / 307 309 / 2017

High Court of Panadura Case

No: 2774 /2010

In the matter of an Appeal in

terms of Section 331 (1) of the

Code of Criminal Procedure Act

No 15 of 1979 read with Article

138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka.

The Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Hon. Attorney General.

Attorney General Department

Colombo 12.

Complainant

Vs.

1. Illeperuma Arachchige Don Suraj Priyashantha.

2. Ranasinghege Nilantha Chaminda Perera.

3. Illeperuma Arachchige Don Manoj Nishantha.

Accused

AND PRESENTLY

Page 2 of 10

Illeperuma Arachchige Don Manoj Nishantha.

3rd Accused Appellant

Vs.

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Hon. Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department

Colombo 12.

Complainant Respondent

Before: Menaka Wijesundera J.

B. Sasi Mahendran J.

Counsel: Nalin Ladduwohetty, P.C with Kavithri Ubeysekera for the 1st

and 3rd Accused Appellants.

Amila Palliyage appears with Sandee paniWijesooriya and

S.Udugampola for the 2nd Accused Appellant.

Azard Navavi, DSG for the State.

Argued on: 23.03.2023

Decided on: 24.05.2023

Page 3 of 10

MENAKA WIJESUNDERA J.

The instant appeal has been filed to set aside the judgment dated

29.9.2017 of the High Court of Panadura.

The three accused appellants (hereinafter referred to as the appellant)

had been indicted for committing murder and causing hurt on 6.5.2006.

The appellants had pleaded not guilty and the prosecution had led the

evidence of three lay witnesses and the judicial medical officer and the

investigative officers.

When the trial judge called the defense the 1st and the 2nd appellants

had made dock statements and the third had given evidence and

there had been a defense witness who had given evidence on behalf of

the appellants.

Upon the conclusion of the trial the trial judge had convicted all three

appellants for the charges in the indictment.

The grounds of appeal for the 1st and the 3rd are,

1)the lack of proper identity of the appellants at the scene,

2) evidence of the prosecution not being properly considered,

3)evidence of common intention not being properly considered.

The grounds of appeal for the 2nd appellant are also the same as above.

According to the evidence of the prosecution witness Susanga

Gunatillake who had said that there had been a wedding on the alleged

Page 4 of 10

day and an argument had taken place at the wedding between two

parties and after the wedding he had gone to drop Jayalath who had

also been drunk, while he was in Jayalaths house he had received a

phone call on his mobile around midnight stating that Kamal the injured

had been entered to hospital and to inquire about the deceased

because deceased and Kamal had been together at the wedding. The

name of the caller has not come out in evidence but the witness had

gone to the wedding house and on his way he had found the deceased

in a puddle of water injured, and he had been rushed to hospital.

The evidence of Kamal Prasad who is supposed to have been injured

says that at the wedding he had been with Priyantha the deceased and

a scuffle had taken place between the 3 appellants and some others

and he and everybody had consumed alcohol and he deceased and

Upul had left the wedding house in the midnight and Upul had been

dropped and thereafter the three wheeler had been stopped by the 1st

appellant and he had stabbed the witness with a knife and he had been

held by the 2nd appellant and when he tried to run the 3rd appellant had

stopped him. The third appellant had stabbed the deceased and the

witness had run off. He is supposed to have identified the appellants

with the aid of the light which had been coming from the wedding

house which had been about 75 feet away.

In cross examination the defense had brought to the notice of Court

that the witness Kamal had failed to mention, to police that,

1)the 2nd appellant had held him, during the stabbing,

2)the third appellant had stabbed the deceased,

Page 5 of 10

3)the appellants entering in to a fight with others at the wedding,

4)the second appellants name.

In cross examination he had said that apart from the three appellants

there were about six to seven other people at the time of the incident.

He does not say in evidence as to how he went to the hospital but the

police had not recovered a three wheeler from the scene.

It had been suggested to him that the third appellant had been referred

to as the thattya to police and not by name. The Counsel for the

appellants pointed out that it is most unusual for the witness to refer to

the 3rd appellant by a nickname when they had known each other.

He had said in evidence that he had been examined in hospital on the

7th morning around 10 am. But he does not speak as to how he got to

the hospital but he says that he also ran after the stabbing and the

deceased also ran towards the back of the three wheeler but the

deceased had been stabbed by then, thereafter he does not speak as to

what happened to the deceased.

The prosecution led the evidence of the fifth witness namely

Vithanage Roshan Chaminda according to whom he had gone to the

wedding on the date of the incident and thereafter there had been a

scuffle between the appellants and another party and when he left the

wedding house, he had met the appellants on his way out and the first

appellant had been armed with a knife and had tried to stab him and at

that place the second appellant also had been present but he had been

referred to as the thattaya. But in cross examination it had been

Page 6 of 10

brought to the notice of Court that all what had been mentioned

above had not been told to police.

The doctor who conducted the postmortem had given evidence and he

had recorded the time of death as 3.28 am on 7.5.2006 and had

observed one fatal injury to the abdomen of the deceased and it had

been classified as being the cause of death. A high level of alcohol had

been identified in the deceased. .

According to the examination done on the injured he had given the

assailants names as being Suraj and Manoj and his injuries had been

classified as being non-grievous.

The evidence of the investigative officers had been that the first

information had been received at 4.45.am on 6.5.2006 and the

statement of the injured had been recorded at 12 noon on 7.5.2006 in

hospital. He had made a further statement on the 10th of the same

month, but yet there had been some glaring infirmities in the evidence

of the injured person.

Thereafter the prosecution case had been closed and the defense had

been called and the 1st and the second appellants had made statements

from the dock and the 3rd appellant had given evidence on oath.

The first appellant had pleaded ignorance and had said that he went to

the wedding with his wife and baby and he returned home with them

around 10pm and he did not know anything about the incident.

The second appellant had said that he does not know anything and that

he had lived at kiribathgoda on the day of the incident.

Page 7 of 10

The third appellant has said that he went to the wedding and that there

were several fights which had taken place and in one such fight he also

had to get involved to settle, and around 10.45 pm he had left the

wedding house.

The defense had called the bride-groom of the wedding and he had said

in evidence that the 3rd appellant had been in a photograph with him

and the bride and at that time which is also the day of the incident he

had not been bold headed as stated by the witness Kamal and

Chaminda of the prosecution and the said picture had been marked as Y

in the defense case. He further says that all three appellants came for

the wedding and later in the day he had got to know that the deceased

and Kamal had been injured and the deceased had been found fallen

near his house.

The trial judge had narrated the evidence given by the prosecution and

the defense but had failed to consider the contradictions and the

omissions which had been highlighted during the trial in the

prosecution evidence.

In the case of Wickramasuriya vs Dedolina and others by Jayasuriya J

1996 2SLR 95 it has been held that the issue is whether the

contradiction or the inconsistency goes to the root of the case or

relates to the core of the partys case. If the contradiction is not of

that character the Court ought to accept the evidence of witnesses

who is otherwise cogent, having regard to the test of probability and

improbability and having regard to the demeanor and deportment

manifested by witnesses.

Page 8 of 10

In the instant matter the main eye witnesses have contradicted

gravely in the identification of the appellants which the trial judge has

failed at least to mention in the judgment leave alone consider the

same which this Court is of the opinion has created a reasonable

doubt in the prosecution evidence. Furthermore, it is the evidence of

the prosecution that at the time of the incident the deceased the

appellants and the rest of the crowd at the wedding have been heavily

intoxicated and in fact at the place of incident that it is evidence that

there were around seven or eight other people near the three wheeler

which had been targeted by the appellants according to the

prosecution evidence. Furthermore, according to the eyewitnesses of

the prosecution the attach had taken place around midnight but the

time of death had been according to the doctor around 3 45 am of the

7th of May and the deceased had been discovered by the prosecution

well near midnight hence the question arises as to who may have

attached the deceased other than the appellants.

The Counsel for the appellants raised the position that the injured

namely Kamal being the friend of the deceased after the attach leaves

the deceased where he was and runs off and he is ambiguous as to

how he came to the hospital which the prosecution also has failed to

place before Court only raises a doubt as to the creditworthiness of

the witness Kamal which in the opinion of this Court is worthy of

consideration and raises a doubt in the case of the prosecution. In

such a situation the benefit of the doubt has to be given to the

appellants according to the fundamental principles of criminal law.

Page 9 of 10

We also observe as raised by the appellants Counsel that the trial

judge had failed consider the case for the defense but instead, she had

said that the defense in fact substantiates the position of the

prosecution.

But it has been held in case of James Silve vs The Republic of Sri Lanka

1980 (2) SLR 167 that it is a grave error for a trial judge to direct

himself that he must examine the tenability and truthfulness of the

evidence of the defense in the light of the evidence by the

prosecution. Our criminal law postulates a fundamental presumption

of legal innocence of every accused till the contrary is proved, this is

rooted in the concept of legal inviolability of every individual in our

society, now enshrined in our constitution . The trial judge had

totally disregarded the position of the defense witness on the basis

that the negative of the photograph marked has not been placed

before Court which we think has no merit because in this day and age

everything is digital and you do not anymore find negatives in

photography. The evidence of the defense witness in fact totally cuts

across the identification of the 3rd appellant by the witness Kamal and

Cahminda.

Furthermore, we observe that the charges against the appellants had

been preferred under the principle of common intention but we find

that at some point the trail judge had considered the case of the

appellants on the basis of common object which we think is a clear

misdirection on the part of the trail judge.

It has been well said in the case of Alwis vs Piyasena Fernando 1993

(1) SLR 119 that ..primary findings by a trial judge who hears and sees

Page 10 of 10

the witnesses are not to be disturbed lightly in appeal but in the

instant case in view of the glaring contradictions in the prosecution

case and the appellants had been denied a fair trial in view of the

inadequate consideration of the case for the defense by the trial judge

and the presence of others at the scene apart from the appellants

creates a reasonable doubt in the case for the prosecution which

according to the fundamentals of criminal law has to be given to the

appellants.

As such the instant appeal is allowed and the conviction and the

sentence of the trial judge is hereby set aside.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.

I agree.

B. Sasi Mahendran J.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.