==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0188-189/23

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138(1) of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal Case No. 1. Marakkala Manage Sampath

CA/HCC/ 0188-0189/2023 Priyankara

High Court of Colombo 2. Jayaweera Arachchige Don Deshapriya

Case No. HCB/1961/2013 Ranasinghe

Accused-Appellants

Vs.

The Director General

Commission to Investigate

Allegations of Bribery or Corruption

No.36, Malalasekera Mawatha,

Colomb0-07.

Complainant-Respondent

CA/HCC/0188-189/23

2 | P a g e

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Anil Silva, PC with Anjana Abeyratne for

the 1st Appellant.

A.S.M. Perera, PC with Janani De Silva for

the 2nd Appellant.

Asitha Antony, Deputy Director General,

Bribery Commission for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 19/01/2026

DECIDED ON : 24/03/2026

*********************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellants (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellants) were indicted by the Director General of the Bribery Commission

in the High Court of Colombo.

1. Between 01st August 2011 and 21st September 2011 at Bandarawela,

which is within the jurisdiction of this Court, the 1st accused being a

public servant, to wit, a Member of the Municipal Council of

Bandarawela did solicit a gratification of a sum of Rs. 2,000,000/-

from Sawkenda Mudiyanselage Piyasena as an inducement or reward

CA/HCC/0188-189/23

3 | P a g e

to do an official act, to wit, to take steps to handover a Boutique at the

Vegetable Wholesale Market situated within the area of the

Bandarawela Municipal Council and thereby had committed an

offence punishable under Section 19(b) of the Bribery Act.

2. At the same time and place and in the course of the same transaction

referred to in Charge 1, the 1st accused being a public servant, to wit,

a Member of the Municipal Council of Bandarawela did solicit a

gratification of a sum of Rs. 2,000,000/- from Sawkenda

Mudiyanselage Piyasena and thereby committed an offence punishable

under Section 19(c) of the Bribery Act as amended.

3. On 22nd September 2011 at the same place and in the course of the

same transaction referred to in Charge 1, the 1st accused being a

public servant, to wit, a Member of the Municipal Council of

Bandarawela did accept a gratification of a sum of Rs. 800,000/- from

Sawkenda Mudiyanselage Piyasena as an inducement or reward to do

an official act, to wit, to take steps to handover a Boutique at the

Vegetable Wholesale Market situated within the area of the

Bandarawela Municipal Council and thereby committed an offence

punishable under Section 19(b) of the Bribery Act.

4. At the same time and place and in the course of the same transaction

referred to in Charge 3, the 1st accused being a public servant, to wit,

a Member of the Municipal Council of Bandarawela did accept a

gratification of a sum of Rs. 800,000/- from Sawkenda Mudiyanselage

Piyasena and thereby committed an offence punishable under Section

19(c) of the Bribery Act as amended.

5. At the same time and place and in the course of the same transaction

referred to in Charge 3, the 2nd accused had abetted the 1st accused to

commit the offence referred to in charge 3 and as a consequence of the

said abatement, the 1st accused had committed the said offence and

thereby the 2nd accused committed an offence punishable under

CA/HCC/0188-189/23

4 | P a g e

Section 19(b) of the Bribery Act read with Section 25(2) of the Bribery

Act.

6. At the same time and place and in the course of the same transaction

referred to in Charge 4, the 2nd accused had abetted the 1st accused to

commit the offence referred to in charge 4 and as a consequence of the

said abatement the 1st accused had committed the said offence and

thereby the 2nd accused committed an offence punishable under

Section 19(c) of the Bribery Act read with Section 25(2) of the Bribery

Act as amended.

The prosecution had called 09 witnesses and marked documents P1 to P7

and closed their case. Having been satisfied that there is a case to be

answered by the Appellants, the learned High Court Judge had called for the

defence. Both Appellants had given evidence from the witness box and had

marked productions V1 to V7 and closed their case.

The learned High Court Judge by his judgment dated 28.10.2022 found the

1st Appellant guilty of Count 2 and 4 and had acquitted the 1st Appellant

from Counts 1 and 3.

The learned High Court Judge found the 2nd Appellant guilty of Count

number 6 and had acquitted him from Count number 5.

The learned Judge of the High Court of Colombo had imposed the following

sentences on the Appellants.

For the 2nd Count the 1st Appellant was sentenced to 05 years rigorous

imprisonment with a fine of Rs.5,000/- subject to a default sentence of 01-

year simple imprisonment.

For the 4th Count the 1st Appellant was sentenced to 05 years rigorous

imprisonment with a fine of Rs.5,000/- subject to a default sentence of 01-

year simple imprisonment. Additionally, the 1st Appellant was imposed a fine

of Rs.800,000/- with a default sentence of 01-year simple imprisonment.

CA/HCC/0188-189/23

5 | P a g e

The Court further ordered that the jail sentences imposed on Counts 2-4

against the 1st Appellant to run consecutively.

For the 6th Count the 2nd Appellant was sentenced to 05 years rigorous

imprisonment with a fine of Rs.5,000/- subject to a default sentence of 01-

year simple imprisonment.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid convictions and sentences, the Appellants

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Appellants were present in this Court on the day of the argument as they

were on bail pending appeal granted by the High Court.

Background of the case albeit briefly is as follows:

According to PW1, Piyasena had been a businessman in the Bandarawela

Town but had handed over his shop to another person. The Bandarawela

Municipal Council had demolished this shop in order to put up a shopping

complex. As the shops which were constructed by the Bandarawela

Municipal Council were going to be rented out, PW1 also tried to get one unit

from the shopping complex. When he met the Mayor of the Bandarawela

Municipal Council, he was informed that all the shops in the shopping

complex had already been allocated.

Having come to know that he could secure a shop through the 1st Appellant

who was a member of the Bandarawela Municipal Council, he had met the

1st Appellant at the Municipality. The 1st Appellant had then solicited 2.2

million Rupees from him to secure a unit in the shopping complex. The 1st

Appellant had then told PW1 that he had to give one million Rupees to the

Mayor, and that the balance would be shared among the Appellants.

PW1 had lodged a complaint with the Bribery Commission and a trap was

arranged. According to the prosecution, the 1st Appellant had accepted

Rs.800,000/- from the complainant.

CA/HCC/0188-189/23

6 | P a g e

Both Appellants had given evidence from the witness box. According to the

1st Appellant, as the Complainant wanted a shop, he had introduced a person

called Daya Punchihewa, a businessman who wanted to lease out his shop

to another person. To enter into an agreement, the complainant and Daya

Punchihewa had been taken to the office of Ruwan Basnayake, Attorney -at-

Law. As the documents were not prepared, the Complainant was asked to

come on the following day with Rs.800,000/- in cash and three blank

cheques to be given to Daya Punchihewa. On the following day, the 1st

Appellant was taken to a three-wheeler which was parked close to the

Bandarawela Municipal Council, where the Appellant alleges that

Rs.800,000/- was forcibly given to him and that he was arrested.

Subsequently, the 2nd Appellant too was arrested.

On behalf of the 1st Appellant, the following Grounds of Appeal were raised:

1. Has the prosecution proved the case beyond a reasonable doubt?

2. Has the Appellant’s evidence been rejected without reasonable

grounds?

3. Have the matters favourable to the Appellant not been evaluated

properly by the learned High Court Judge?

The Learned President’s Counsel for the 2nd Appellant informed the court

that he too sails with the appeal grounds put forward by the 1st Appellant.

As all the grounds of appeal raised by the Learned President’s Counsel for

the 1st Appellant are interconnected, I will hereby consider all the grounds of

appeal together as follows.

In a criminal trial, it is incumbent on the prosecution to prove the case

beyond a reasonable doubt. There is no burden on the Appellant to prove his

innocence. This is the “Golden Thread” as discussed in Woolmington v. DPP

[1935] A.C.462. In this case Viscount Sankey J held that:

“Throughout the web of the English Criminal Law one golden thread is

always to be seen, that it is the duty of the prosecution to prove the

CA/HCC/0188-189/23

7 | P a g e

prisoner’s guilt…… If, at the end of and on the whole of the case, there

is a reasonable doubt, created by the evidence given by either the

prosecution or the prisoner…..the prosecution has not made out the case

and the prisoner is entitled to an acquittal.”

In the case of Shivaji Sahebrao Bobade & Anr. v. State of Maharashtra

AIR 1973 SC 2622, the Supreme Court of India held that:

“the cherished principles of the golden thread of proof beyond

reasonable doubt which runs through the web of our law should not be

stretched morbidly to embrace every hunch and degree of doubt. … Only

reasonable doubts belong to the accused. Otherwise, any practical

system of justice will break down and lose credibility with the

community.”

At the very outset, the learned President’s Counsel for the 2nd Appellant

informed the Court that he would agree with the argument put forward by

the Learned President’s Counsel for the 1st Appellant.

Each charge delves on the basis that the 1st Appellant had solicited and

accepted a bribe from the complainant, PW1 in order to secure a shop for

him in the vegetable whole sale market. The 2nd Appellant was charged for

aiding and abetting the 1st Appellant to accept the money from the

Complainant.

As stated earlier the position held by the 1st Appellant was that he had only

facilitated the Complainant to purchase a shop belonging to one Daya

Punchihewa.

According to PW1, Piyasena had gone to the Ornamental Fish Shop belonging

to the 1st Appellant’s father along with two Bribery Officers on 22.09.2011.

There a discussion had taken place, and the 1st Appellant had then left. At

that time, no solicitation was made or any gratification was accepted.

CA/HCC/0188-189/23

8 | P a g e

An Investigation Officer of CIABOC was selected as the decoy, who is PW2 in

this case. Notably, in his evidence, he did not mention about the presence of

two bribery officers at the Ornamental Fish Shop.

After waiting for some time, as the 1st Appellant had not come, they had left

the place. After a short while, PW1 had received a call from the 1st Appellant

requesting him to come to the Bandarawela Urban Council Office. There they

met the 2nd Appellant who had allegedly asked them to give the money to the

1st Appellant.

According to the evidence of PW2 the decoy, after receiving a call the

Complainant and the 1st Appellant had gone to the office of Attorney-at-Law

Ruwan Kumara Basnayake, who is PW08 in this case. The decoy was asked

not to proceed to the attorney’s office by the investigation officer. As such,

he was unaware as to what had taken place there. After returning from the

attorney’s office with the 1st Appellant, the Complainant had told the decoy

that they could not finalise the transaction. As such, the 1st Appellant had

told the Complainant to come on the following day during the evening, with

Rs.800,000/- cash and three blank cheques. As per the request by the decoy,

the parties agreed to come in the morning. Although the money was brought

on that day, no acceptance had taken place.

The relevant portion is re-produced below:

Pages 409-410 of the brief.

m% ( tf,i oekqï oSfuka miafia idlaIslre fudllao .;a; mshjr @

W ( fï isÿùu fmd'm' .=Kj¾Ok uy;a;hd lsh,d meñKs,slreg;a lsh,d ud;a

meñKs,slre;a Tyqf.a ;%Sfrdao r:fhka rejka niakdhl uy;a;hdf.a ld¾hd,h

lsÜgqjg .shd'

m% ( rejka niakdhl uy;a;hdf.a ld¾hd,h fldfyao msysg,d ;sfhkafka @

W ( nKavdrfj, k.rfha'

m% ( ta fkd;drsia uy;a;hdf. ldurh we;=,g ;uka,d .shd o @

CA/HCC/0188-189/23

9 | P a g e

W ( kE iajdóks' ld¾hd,hg hkfldg .=Kj¾Ok uy;a;hd ug lsõjd ;%Sfrdao r:fha

i,a,s ál ug ;shdf.k bkak lsh,d meñKs,slre muKla ta fkd;drsia uy;a;hd

yïnfjkak hjkak lsõjd'

Page 445 of the brief.

m% ( kuq;a 1 jk ú;a;sldrhd lsõfõ kS;s{ uy;aufhla .djg .sys,a,d Tnf.a

lgW;a;rfha miq.sh j;dfõ" .sys,a,d mrK whs;sldrhdf.ka osjqreï fm;aiula

.kak ´kE lsh,d fka lsõfõ @

W ( .súiqula w;aika lr,d lrkjd lsõjd iajdñkS'

m% ( tal ;uhs lsõfõ" t;fldg ,shqu .kak ´kE mrK whs;sldrhdf.ka lshk tl

lsõjdu ta i`oyd kS;s{ uy;aufhla biairy;a .kak ´kE lsh,d lsõjd @

W ( ,`.g hkak ´kE lsõjd iajdñkS'

PW8, the Attorney-at-Law, in his evidence confirmed that the Complainant

had come to his office with a person called Dayananda to transfer a shop

owned by Dayananda to the Complainant. Further, he confirmed the

presence of the 1st Appellant at that occasion.

The relevant portion is re-produced below:

Page 549 of the breief.

m% ( 2011.09.21 fjks osk iji uy;auhdf.a ld¾hd,hg fuu w,a,ia fldñiug ÿka

m%ldYhg wod,j meñKs mqoa.,hka u;l yeáhg ljqo @

W ( uf.a u;lfha yeáhg ohdkkao lshk mqoa.,fhla meñKshd' ohdkkao mqxÑ fyajd'

wks;a ;eke;a;d mshfiak úh hq;=hs iy ta w;r ;j fiajdodhlhka f.dvla ysáhd ta

w;r iïm;a lshk uy;aufhl=;a ysáhd'

m% ( Th ohdkkao lshk ;eke;a;d uy;auhdf.a ld¾hd,hg meñKsfha uy;auhdf.ka

l=uk ld¾hhla lr .ekSugo @

CA/HCC/0188-189/23

10 | P a g e

W ( ohdkkao lshk uy;auhd ug m%ldY lr isáhd Tyqg nKavdrfj, k.r iNdjg

wh;a lvhla mj;sk nj;a" th mshfiak keue;a;dg mejrSula l< hq;= nj;a ta

iïnkaOfhka ks;S Wmfoia udf.ka úuid isáhd'

But the Complainant in his evidence completely denied that he had gone to

the attorney’s office. The relevant portion is re-produced below:

Pages 298-299 of the brief.

m% ( .re wêlrKhg ;uqka osjqr,d idlaIs fokafka fkao @

W ( Tõ'

m% ( .sfha keoao kS;s{ uy;aufhl=f.a ld¾hd,hg rejka niakdhl lsh,d" lshkak .re

W;=udKkag yrshgu @

W ( wms .sfha keye'

m% ( wms .shdo fkdfõ uu wykafka uy;auhd .shdo keoao @

W ( uu .sfha keye'

As the Complainant denied going to the office of the attorney, the defence

had marked very vital contradictions to support their version.

The relevant portion is re-produced below:

Pages 300-304 of the brief.

m% ( n,kak 2011.09.23 jeks osk idlaIslre úiska w,a,ia fomd¾;fïka;=jg fok ,o lg

W;a;rfha msgqj fuu kvq jd¾;dj wkqj 47 jeks msgqj' by, isg my,g 12 jeks

fma,sh lshjhs' uy;auhd fufyu lsõjd o @ —Bgmiafia uu yidka uy;auhd;a tlal

.syska niakdhl uy;auhdf.a T*sia tlg .shd" nKavdrfj, k.r iNdj biairy

mdr whsfka ;%Sù,a tl k;r lr,d˜ lsh,d Tn;=ud lg W;a;rhla os,d ;shkjd

2011.09.23 jeks osk Tn .re W;=udKkag kej; wo lshkjdo Tn niakdhl uy;d

yuq fjkak .sfha keye lsh,d @

CA/HCC/0188-189/23

11 | P a g e

W ( yrshg u;l keye'

m% ( oeka biafi,a,d lsõjdfka .sfha keye lsh,d" uy;auhd okakjd fïl b;du jeo.;a

isoaêhla @ Tn;=ud lshkak niakdhl kS;s{;=ud Tnj w`ÿrkjdfka fyd`ogu @

W ( ta uy;a;hd fyd`og w`ÿrkjd' uu .sfha keye'

m% ( tfyu kï fï isoaêh fj,d fï fojeks oji" fojeks oji;a fkdfjhs 22 jeksod

;uhs ;uqka,d iïm;a uka;%S;=udf.a ld¾hd,hg uqo,a ÿkakd lshkafka" 23 jeksod

ojilg miafia oSmq lg W;a;rfhaoS niakdhl kS;s{;=ud yïn fjkak .shd lshmq

tl wo Tn;=ud lshkafka .sfha keye lsh,d @

W ( ug tal u;l keye'

• .re W;=udKkS" —Bgmiq uu yidka uy;auhd tlal .syska niakdhl uy;auhdf.a

T*sia tlg .shd lshk fldgi ˜ mriamrúfrdaë;djhla f,i ,l=Kq lrkjd'

m% ( tmuKla fkdfõ uy;auhd Tn;=ud tosku —Bg miafia uu iïm;a uka;%S;=ud tlal

niakdhl uy;auhdf.a T*sia tlg .shd˜ Tkak kej;;a Tn;=udf.a lg W;a;rfha"

fï ojia follg miafia @

W ( u;l keye'

m% ( B,`.g tfyu kï uu Tn;=udg fhdackd lf,d;a iïm;a uy;auhd tlal niakdhl

uy;auhdf.a ld¾hd,hg .shd lsh,d lsõfjd;a Tn;=ud lshkafka tal .re W;=udKkag

yrs lsh,d o" jeroshs lsh,d o @

W ( ug u;l keye'

m% ( uu ;uqkag lshkjd ;uqka .re wêlrKhg lsisu f.!rjhla ke;=j wi;H idlaIs

fok idlaIslrefjla" ;uqkag fï isoaêh fj,d myqfjksod" ta isoaêh fjÉp ojig

biafi,a,d ojfia kS;s{;=udf.a ld¾hd,hg .shd lshk tl ;uqkag u;l keye ;uqka

Wjukdfjka wêlrKh fkdu`. hkjd lsh,d" uu ;uqkag fhdackd lrkjd ;uqka

;jÿrg;a lsh,d ;shkjd @

B,`.g lshkak n,kak niakdhl uy;auhdf.a T*sia tl ;sfhkafka fldfyao @

W ( k.r iNdj biairy'

m% ( k.r iNdj biairy fï f.dve.s,af,a" Wv ;Ügqfõ o" hg ;Ügqfõ o @

CA/HCC/0188-189/23

12 | P a g e

W ( Wv ;Ügqfõ'

m% ( Tn;=ud t;fldg tfyu kï n,kak fufyuj;a lsh,d keoao lsh,d — ta T*sia tl

;sfnkafka ì,aäka tfla Wv ;Ügqfõ ˜ lsh,d Tn;=ud ms<s.kakjd" niakdhl

uy;auhdf.a T*sia tl ;sfhkafka k.r iNdj biairy lsh,d @

W ( wms yeu fj,dfõu olsk ksid ms<s .kakjd'

m% ( tal ;uhs Tn;=ud tod .sh ksid fyd`ogu okakjd tal Wv ;Ügqfõ ;sfhkafka lshk

tl @

W ( oekg;a Wv ;Ügqfõ ;sfhkafka'

m% ( tmuKla fkdfõ uy;auhd — wms fokakd t;kg hkfldg;a niakdhl uy;auhd

uf.ka weyeõjd whsäkaá ldâ tl f.kdjdo lsh,d" talg uu lsõjd whsâkaáh

f.kdfõ keye˜ lsh,d Tkak .re W;=udKkag lshkafka fï lshmq lg W;a;rh wkqj

Tn .sfha keye lsh,d niakdhl uy;auhdf.a ld¾hd,hg @

W ( ug u;l keye'

m% ( .sfha keye @

W ( keye'

m% ( uu tu fldgi ,l=Kq lrkjd" Bg miafia uu iïm;a uka;%S;=ud tlal niakdhl

uy;auhdf.a T*sia tlg .shd" ta T*sia tl ;snqfka ì,aäka tfla Wv ;Ügqfõ" wms

fokakd t;kg hkfldg;a niakdhl uy;auhd uf.ka weyeõjd whsâkaá ldâ tl

f.kdjdo lsh,d" talg uu lsõjd whsâkaáh f.kdfõ keye lsh,d˜ W;=udKks" uu

tu fldgi ù' 6 jYfhka ,l=Kq lrkjd mriamrùfrdaë;djhla jYfhka'

The denial that the Complainant did not go to the attorney’s office contradicts

the evidence given by PW2, the decoy and PW8, the Attorney-at-Law which

certainly affects the credibility of the witness.

The President’s Counsel highlighted another glaring contradiction between

the evidence of PW1 and PW2. According to PW1, the money which was

allegedly given to the 1st Appellant, was handed over to him by a bribery

officer when they were seated in the three-wheeler.

CA/HCC/0188-189/23

13 | P a g e

The relevant portion is re-produced below:

Page 343 of the brief.

m% ( oeka uy;auhd wr Wfoa yïn jqkd lsõjdfka" i,a,s fokak lsh,d lsõjd" i,a,s ÿkakdo@

W ( i,a,s ;snqfka ;j uy;aufhla wf;a' ta uy;a;hd ug i,a,s álla ÿkakd .ek,d fokak

lsh,d iïm;a uka;%S;=udg' .ek,d uu;a yika uy;a;hd;a" wr uy;a;hdg ÿkakd'

But PW2, the decoy, took up the position that the said money was with him

until the conclusion of the raid.

The relevant portion is re-produced below:

Page 416 of the brief.

m% ( ta uqo,a l¿ nE.a tllg odf.k ld Ndrfha o ;snqfKa @

W ( ud Ndrfha ;sífn'

m% ( fï i,a,s ;ud Ndrfha fldmuK muK fj,djla hklka ;snqKdo o< jYfhka @

W ( jeg,Su isÿjk ;=re ux .dj ;sínd'

The contradiction highlighted by the defence too will also, without a doubt,

affect the credibility of the prosecution witnesses and certainly strengthen

the version taken up by the defence in this case.

In a bribery case, the factor that determines whether the prosecution will

succeed or fail is the credibility of the complainant. As bribery would mostly

entail a consensual, secretive act which would not involve any direct physical

evidence, the case would depend on the credibility of the witness’s word as

opposed to the accused. In cases with non-credible complainants, it would

be difficult to establish the necessary chain of evidence, therefore this would

adversely affect the possibility of securing a conviction.

CA/HCC/0188-189/23

14 | P a g e

In Kalinga Padmatilaka v The Director General of Commission to

Investigate Allegation of Bribery or Corruption SC Appeal 99/2007

decided on 30.07.2009 the Supreme Court held that:

“It has to be stressed here that credibility of prosecution witnesses

should be subject to judicial evaluation in totality and not isolated

scrutiny by the Judge. When witnesses make inconsistent statements

in their evidence either at one stage or at 2 stages, the testimony of such

witnesses is unreliable and in the absence of special circumstances, no

conviction can be based on the testimony of such witnesses. On the

other hand, one cannot be unmindful of the proposition that Court cannot

mechanically reject the evidence of any witness.

In Gurcharan Singh V. State of Haryana - Criminal Law Journal 1994 (2)

171 the Court held that:

“Where the material witnesses make inconsistent statements in their

evidence on material particulars, the evidence of such witnesses

becomes unreliable and unworthy of credence, thus making the

prosecution case highly doubtful.”

In the case of State of Uttar Pradesh v. M. K. Anthony [AIR 1985 SC 48]

the court held that:

“While appreciating the evidence of a witness, the approach must be

whether the evidence of the witness read as a whole appears to have a

ring of truth. Once that impression is formed, it is undoubtedly

necessary for the court to scrutinise the evidence more particularly

keeping in view the deficiencies, draw-backs and infirmities pointed out

in the evidence as a whole and evaluate them to find out whether it is

against the general tenor of the evidence given by the witness and

whether the earlier evaluation of the evidence is shaken as to render it

unworthy of belief. Minor discrepancies on trivial matters not touching

the core of the case, hyper-technical approach by taking sentences torn

CA/HCC/0188-189/23

15 | P a g e

out of context here or there from the evidence, attaching importance to

some technical error committed by the investigating officer not going to

the: root of the matter would not ordinarily permit rejection of the

evidence as a whole..…Even honest and truthful witnesses may differ

in some details unrelated to the main incident because power of

observation, retention and reproduction differ with individuals. Cross

examination is an unequal duel between a rustic and refined lawyer.”

The prosecution had mainly relied on the evidence given by PW1 and PW2 to

prove the charges levelled against the Appellants. However, upon

examination of their evidence, it is clear that PW1 and PW2 are unreliable

witnesses. PW1 had completely suppressed the fact about going to the

attorney’s office in order to enter into a transfer agreement with a person

called Dayananda who owned a shop in the Bandarawela Municipality

premises. Unfortunately, the said Dayananda was dead before he could give

evidence in this case.

These contradictions are of great importance given the fact that the

Appellants had consistently taken the stance that they had merely facilitated

the Complainant to purchase a shop belonging to Dayananda.

Although the above-mentioned contradictions were not marked, it is the duty

of the Trial Judge to consider such evidence, which is favourable to the

Accused, with utmost care.

In criminal trials, judges bear the responsibility and fundamental duty of

ensuring a fair trial. Doing so requires a careful consideration of all the

evidence available, including exculpatory evidence, which refers to evidence

which would be favourable to the defence. This duty also entails maintaining

the presumption of innocence and ensuring that an accused is not convicted

merely due to a one-sided presentation of the case.

CA/HCC/0188-189/23

16 | P a g e

Furthermore, it is pertinent to note that right to a fair trial that every accused

has. As such, according to the principles of a fair trial, the accused’s

innocence or guilt in respect of the alleged crime will be ascertained by way

of the legal procedure set in place to guarantee the fair and just treatment of

individuals accused of crimes. This includes the right to a hearing by an

independent and impartial court within a reasonable time period, the

presumption of innocence until proven guilty, the right to legal

representation, the ability to present one’s case and the right to question and

cross examine evidence against them. While this right is an internationally

recognised and respected human right, they act as a major cornerstone of

democracy, due to their role in ensuring fairness and justice and to limit

abuse of powers of governments and other state authorities and institutions.

In the case of Rowe and Davis v the United Kingdom [2000] ECHR, The

European Court of Human Rights held:

“… in a criminal case, that both prosecution and defence must be given the

opportunity to have knowledge of and comment on the observations filed

and the evidence adduced by the other party.”

The Supreme Court in The Queen v Liyanage and Others (1963) 65 NLR

337, stated that:

“… on a trial upon Indictment, by the very essence of the pre-trial

procedure, an accused person becomes aware of all the evidence relied

upon by the Crown in support of the Indictment and which the Crown

intends to place against him at the trial. He is entitled in law to know such

evidence before he is called upon to plead to the Indictment. It is a right of

his, inherent in that procedure.”

In this case with the glaring contradictions, the learned High Court Judge

has come to his own conclusion that the 2nd ,4th and 6th charges had been

proved beyond a reasonable doubt.

CA/HCC/0188-189/23

17 | P a g e

The Apex Court of Sri Lanka has established precedent in a number of cases

stating that the defense would prevail when there is a contradiction that

affects the core of the case.

When a witness gives evidence before the court upon oath, he or she is

expected to tell the truth in a court of law. If the person gives contradictory

evidence opposite to the statement, it is usually called a contradiction. It is

the duty of the trial judge to unearth the truth and to arrive at a conclusion

on whether an Accused person is guilty or not.

In the case of State Rep. by Inspector of Police v. Saravanan AIR 2009 SC

152 the Court held that:

“The contradictions/omissions must be of such nature which materially

affects the trial. Minor contradictions, inconsistencies, embellishments

or improvements which do not affect the core of the prosecution case

should not be made a ground to reject the evidence of the witness in its

entirety.”

In the case of Shamal Ghosh Vs. State of West Bengal 2012 All. S. C. R,

1921the Court held that:

“Omission to state a fact whether it is a material contradiction or not is

a question of fact. The discretion is left with the Court to determine

whether it is a contradiction or material contradiction which renders the

entire evidence of the witness untrustworthy and affects the case of

prosecution materially.

In the recent Court of Appeal judgment CA HCC 190/2024, dated

28.03.2025 it was noted that:

“It is essential to recognise that while discrepancies may exist, they do not

necessarily reflect a lack of credibility and reliability; instead, it is quite

clear that they stem from the complexities of human memory or the detailed

CA/HCC/0188-189/23

18 | P a g e

nature of the events in question. Ultimately, these issues should not

distract from the comprehensive truth the prosecution seems to establish.

It is essential to understand the implications of such discrepancies and

the broader principles of justice that must prevail. Therefore, absence of a

precise date should not be viewed as a lack of credibility rather it

highlights the need for sensitivity and understanding the judicial process.

Moreover, the cornerstone of a fair trial lies in the comprehensive

examination of all evidence presented, rather than singular date. To

dismiss a case solely due to an imprecise date undermines the principal of

justice and the potential for truth to be revealed through crucial

examination.”

In the case of Mohamed Niyas Naufer and others v. Attorney General (Sc.

01/2006 decided on 08/12/2006), the Court observed that;

"when faced with contradictions in a witness's testimonial, the Court must

bear in mind the nature and significance of the contradictions, viewed in

light of the whole of the evidence given by the witness."

As the contradictory evidence given by PW1 and PW2 certainly affects the

root of the prosecution’s case, I conclude that the prosecution has not proved

the case against the Appellants beyond a reasonable doubt. Therefore, the

grounds urged by the Learned President’s Counsel for the 1st Appellant have

merit.

The Learned President’s Counsel who appeared for the 2nd Appellant while

endorsing the argument put forward by the learned President’s Counsel on

behalf of the 1st Appellant, strenuously argued that the charges against the

2nd Appellant in the indictment had not been proved beyond a reasonable

doubt by the prosecution. As such, the 2nd Appellant cannot be charged for

aiding and abetting the 1st Appellant in committing the alleged crime.

CA/HCC/0188-189/23

19 | P a g e

As the prosecution has failed to prove the charges beyond a reasonable doubt

against the Appellants, I allow the appeal and acquit them from all the

charges.

The Appeal is allowed.

The Registrar is directed to send this judgment to the High Court of Colombo

along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL