I

I

CA 156/2014 Transfer 26.08.14

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SEI LANKA

8/26,/2014

BETWEEN. J M T M M MADHAWA TENNAKOON - PETITIONER AND S.P.A.B.W.M.R.R.W.J.THARANGIKA WEGODAPOLA-RESPONDENT

BEFORE: A W A SALAM, J (P C/ A)

Romesh Silva PC and Faizer Muthaffa PC for the Petitioner and Respondent respectively.

Oder on the application for transfer.

This is an application is aimed at obtaining an order directing the

of transfer of a maintenance application filed by the respondent

against the petitioner in the Magistrate's Court of Matale. The

parties are married and presently living apart.

In terms of Section 4 (2) of the Maintenance Act, No 37 of 1999, an

application for maintenance may be filed in the Magistrates Court

within whose jurisdiction the applicant or the person in respect of

whom the application is made or the person against whom such

application is made, resides. The maintenance application relating

to these proceedings, has been filed on the basis that the

respondent and her child born during lawful wedlock to the

petitioner are resident within the judicial division of Matale.

Page

I! i I I i I Ii If f I

I

r! II ! I i I

f ! I ! II

j

~'

i

\

\

Section 2 of the Judicature Act [referred to as the "Act"} provides

that the Courts of first instance are (a) the High Court of the

Republic of Sri Lanka, (b) the District Courts, (c) the Family

Courts, (d) the Magistrates' Courts and (e) the Primary Courts.

[emphasis added}

In terms of Section 5 (1) of the Act, as amended by Section 3 of Act

No 71 of 1981] in each judicial district there shall be " a District

Court" which shall be deemed to be the " Family Court" when

exercising the jurisdiction vested in a Family Court 'or any other

written law, and in every judicial division there shall be a

" Magistrate's Court" and a " Primary Court " and each such Court

shall be holden by and before a person to be called the " District

Judge and Judge of the Family Court"," Magistrate " and " Judge

of the Primary Court" respectively.

For the purposes of the administration of justice Sri Lanka shall

be divided into judicial zones, Judicial districts and Judicial

divisions within such territorial limits as may in consultation with

the Chief Justice and the President of the Court of Appeal from

time to time be determined by the Minister by Order published in

the Gazette ( Vide Section 3 of the Judicature Act)

The territorial jurisdiction of the Magistrate Court is known as the

judicial division and the district Court as the Judicial District.

There are two judicial divisions within the Judicial District of

Matale. They are the Judicial division of Matale and Naula. There

is a Magistrate who exercises territorial jurisdiction within Nauala

judicial division and another Magistrate to function within the 2

!It i I,II i I I1

judicial division of Matale, but both divisions together constitute

one judicial district, i. e Matale judicial district which is covered by

the District Judge of Matale.

For practical, administrative and more importantly, judicial

purposes there is a district court holden at Matale which is also

deemed to be the Family Court of Matale, a Magistrate's Court

holden at the same place which is deemed to be the Primary Court

of Matale and a separate Magistrate's Court holden at Naula

which too is deemed to be the Primary Court of Naula . Therefore,

in the strict sense, there is no combine Court in Matale. The two

Courts are separate from each other and their territorial and

judicial jurisdictions are clearly defined.

( Vide PART I : SEC. (I) - GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA -10.11.2010

for territorial jurisdiction)

This means that parties to a maintenance case, if resident at

Nallia, are permitted to file such a case only in the Magistrate's

Court of Naula. They cannot file the same in the Magistrate's

Court of Matale although they are invariably within the judicial

district of Matale. Another reason as to why it cannot be filed in

the district court is that the exclusive jurisdiction to hear

maintenance case is re-vested by Act No 71 of 1981, in the

respective Magistrates Courts. The maintenance cases are re-

vested in the Magistrates Court by repeal of the reference made to

Maintenance Ordinance in the third schedule to the Act. In the

same manner a person who has a right to file a maintenance

application in the Magistrate Court of Matale cannot file the same

3

in the District Court of Matale because the exclusive jurisdiction

both territorial and statutory jurisdiction is restored in the

Magistrate's Court.

As far as the judicial function is concerned both judges are

independent of each other and not under one another. Further,

they are undeniably not interdependent.

In tenns of the Constitution every judge shall exercise his judicial

function without being subject to any direction or: interference

from any other person. Hence, although the judges functioning

at the relevant station perhaps at the same premises or in close

proximity to each other, are neither under one another nor are

they subject to the influence of each other. For an exception to

this rule see Article 116 of the Constitution)

It surfaced in the course of the argument that even the judicial

service commission cannot grant relief to the petitioner, as it will

not interfere or give direction as to the perfonnance of the judicial

function, for under 114 of the Constitution the Judicial Service

Commission IS entrusted only with the powers to make

appointment, transfer, dismissal and disciplinary control of

judicial officers. [Emphasis added]

Significantly, the Judicial Service Commission also enjoys under

Article 115 of the Constitution a constitutional protection against

interference, influence or attempts to influence any of its

decisions.

An application for transfer of a case is governed by Section 46 in

Chapter 17 of the Judicature Act. In terms of the said Provisions

4

[ f ! IIII ,I II I I

l )

f

46 whenever it appears to the Court of Appeal (a) that a fair and

impartial trial cannot be had in any particular court or place; or

(b) that some questions of law of unusual difficulties are likely to

arise; or (c) that a view of the place in or near which any offence is

alleged to have been committed may be required for the

satisfactory inquiry into or trial of the same; or (d) that it is so

expedient on any other ground, the court may order upon such

tenns as to the payment of costs or otherwise as the said court

thinks fit, for the transfer of any action, prosecuti.ori, proceeding

or matter pending before any court to any other court.

As far as the present application is concerned, the petitioner relies

on (b) and (d) in the preceding paragraph to have the maintenance

application transferred from the Magistrate's Court of Matale to

any other court.

One of the grounds urged by the petitioner in support of the

application is that the respondent who resides in Kandy in tenns

of the document marked as D, without filing the application in

Kandy has filed the same in Matale where her sister's brother

(brother-in-law) functions as the District Judge and a fair and

impartial trial cannot be had or is otherwise expedient to have the

said case transferred. In other words, if I have properly

understood him, it is inferable from the petition that the

respondent has deliberately filed the case in Matale with an

ulterior motive.

In dealing with this application for transfer, one has to be

extraordinarily cautious as the learned District Judge who is

referred to as the brother-in-law of the respondent is not a party

5

III

t ! I

II

f

i l I

f I

to the application and therefore is not heard on the matter for or

against. The petitioner is not under a duty to make him a party

but this being a peculiar circumstance under which a transfer of

the case is sought, it needs to be examined with utmost care.

On the question of her residence, the respondent has annexed

several documents to establish that she is a permanent resident of

Matale. She has been registered as a voter for the year 2013 at the

polling division of Rathota at Weligala village in the district of

Matale. The National identity card dated 11/1/2013 reveals her

address as Ratwattawalawwa , Weligala , Ukuwela. The driving

license issued on 1/4/1999 also indicates the respondent as being

a resident of Matale. The certificate of residence and character,

issued by the Grama Niladhari bearing No. 654053 indicates the

address of the respondent as Ratwatta Walauwwa, Weligala,

Ukuwela. The petitioner has not seriously denied the averments

contained in the statement of claim of the respondent as regards

her residence. Hence, it is my view that the initiation of the

maintenance proceedings in the Magistrates court of Matale

appears to be exercise her statutory right she has exercised~

However, this finding of mine is merely superficial and should not

bind the learned Magistrate. If an objection is raised with regard

to the territorial jurisdiction of the Magistrate's Court of Matale

based on non-residence of the respondent, the Magistrate is at

perfect liberty to examine the objection elaborately and pronounce

a different finding on that issue, if he is of the opinion that this

superficial finding warrants a variation.

I!I

6 II 1ir J

The petitioner appears to have no objection to the learned

Magistrate hearing this case. He has not attributed any bias on

the part of the Magistrate. The issue he has put forward in his

pleadings is that a fair and impartial trial cannot be had or it is

expedient to transfer the case by reason of the presence of the

brother-in-law of the respondent in Matale as the District Judge.

As I have pointed out initially, these are two different courts

manned by two different judges. The Magistrate does not function

under the District Judge nor the District Judge has any power of

supervision over the Magistrate. The Magistrate is as independent

as any other judge. The petitioner and the respondent being

members of the legal fraternity ought to have known better that

the Magistrate will not give any undue weight to the application

filed by the respondent or undermine the petitioner's case.

In Kandasamy Vs Subramaniam 63 NLR 54 (cited by the

petitioner) is a case where the judge who participated at a function

on the invitation of complainant was prevented from hearing a

case. it was observed that the real test is whether the party to a

case or even the general public may have some reason to feel that'

the course of justice was not absolutely fair and impartial. The

facts and ruling in that case are not applicable to the present case

as the District Judge has not performed any function regarding

the present case.

The only purported involvement of the District Judge is that the

envelope which contained the summons had the seal of the

District Judge not by the name but by his designation. In every

court where the registry makes a combined effort to serve the

7

IIt I I! I 1 I , I 1 I I t I I I ! I l I I II

Magistrate's Court and District Court at the same time trough one

set of staff headed by one Registrar it is quite possible that the

seal of the District Judge to have been affIxed on the envelope.

This practice must be discouraged. When summons is sent or

other correspondence is made the envelope should indicate that it

originates from the judge who is expected deal with matter,

particularly when a case comes within the exclusive jurisdiction of

a particular court, i.e in this case Magistrate's Court.

This by itself shows no bias or exertion of undue influence by the

District Judge merely because the seal is affIxed by the offIce. It is

common sense that the District Judge knowing very well that the

petitioner is the respondent of the maintenance application who is

also State Counsel would be the last person to affIx his seal on

the envelope thereby playing into the hands of the petitioner

paving the way for an allegation which may be graver in nature.

There is no evidence that the District Judge had anything to with

the dispute between the parties. He has not even played the role of

a mediator. The mere fact that he is the brother-in-law of the

respondent does not disqualify the Magistrate from hearing the'

case.

Let me take the liberty to recall the set up that prevailed those

days. The appointment of a judge to any position is as sacred as

the performance of the judges duty itself. After all, courts are

considered next to places of worship and the judges as the

offIciating priests. To choose the right judge to the right place is a

herculean task. In as much as the appointing authority is

concerned with ascertaining to which position and place a judge

8

i !I

\ iI

f t i f } I I , f i !i I I ! II I t II It I [ I i

~ Ir 1

I

could be appointed or posted the appointee also should assess

himself as to his exact capacity and the area in which he could

perform his function without disappointing the decision making

authority or leaving room for criticism that a fair and impartial

hearing of a case cannot be had before an officer performing such

judicial functions.

In days gone by stringent self-made guidance was followed in

appointing a judge to a particular position and posting him to a

station. In order to avoid unnecessary conflicts of interest and to

ensure that justice is seemed to have been done, it was thought

desirable to compel judges to declare whether they have relatives,

properties in a particular area and other interests before an

appointment or placement is made. Had the District Judge

concerned declared his connection to the area or that of his wife or

interests of the wife's relatives and connection to people in the

area, he cannot be blamed for being posted as District Judge of

Mataale, despite such a declaration. Quite unfortunately no such

information is available to Court to comment further on that

matter.

Be that as it may, the decisions in John Vs Perera 17 NLR 189,

Bandaranayaka Vs De Alwis 1982 2 SLR 664, Abdul Hasheeb Vs

Mendis Perera 1991 SLR 1 243 do not appear to have any direct

impact on the present case. Since, the District Judge has no

control over the Magistrate and the Magistrate not being under the

District Judge the ratios in the above cases are not applicable to

the present application. In my opinion there is no proof that there

is likelihood of bias on the part of the Magistrate. If the case

9

expected to be transferred are divorce proceedings between the

parties the petitioner could have without an iota of doubt

succeeded in the application.

Hence, the transfer application is rejected.

~ ...

President/ Court of Appeal

10