Page 1 of 10

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for mandates in the nature of writ of certiorari under Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. CASE NO: CA/WRIT/330/13

Metilda Ariyapperuma alias Ariyapperuma Arachchige Dona Metilda, No. 324/2, Baseline Road, Seeduwa.

PETITIONER

VS. 1. Hon. Janaka Bandara Tennakon,

Minister of Land and Land Development, Ministry of Land and Land Development. Govijana Mandiraya 80/5, Rajamalwatte Avenue, Battaramulla. 1A. M.K.D.S. Gunawardena,

Minister of Land and Land Development, Ministry of Land and Land Development. Govijana Mandiraya 80/5, Rajamalwatte Avenue, Battaramulla. 1B. Hon. John Amarathunga,

Minister of Land and Land Development,

Page 2 of 10

Ministry of Land and Land Development. Govijana Mandiraya 80/5, Rajamalwatte Avenue, Battaramulla. 2. Secretary,

Ministry of Local Government and Provincial Councils, N. 330, Union Place. Colombo 02. ,

3. Divisional Secretary,

Divisional Secretariate, Pitabeddara. 4. Mrs. Irena Nanayakkara,

Director (Land Acquisition), Ministry of Land and Land Development, Govijana Mandiraya 80/5, Rajamalwatte Avenue, Battaramulla. 5. Commissioner of Land,

Provincial Land Ministry, Southern Provincial Council, Fort, Galle. 6. Ranasinghe Arachchige Prasad,

Pitabeddara, 7. Ranasinghe Archchige Piyadasa

alias Ranasinghe Arachchige Gunasoma Piyadasa, Ranasinghe Tennahaena, Pitabeddara.

8. Ranasinghe Arachchige Ariyadasa.

Ranagiri, Tennehaena, Pitabeddara. RESPONDENTS

Page 3 of 10

Before: M. T. MOHAMMED LAFFAR, J. and

K. K. A. V. SWARNADHIPATHI, J.

Counsel: Pulasthi Hewamanne with Harini Jayawardhena

instructed by Sanjeewa Kaluarachchi for the Petitioner. Ravindra Pathiranage, DSG for the 1st to 5th Respondents. Rohan Sahabandu, PC for the 6th Respondent. Upul Kumarapperum for the 7th and 8th Respondents. Written Submissions on: 30.09.2019 (by the Petitioner). 28.06.2019 (by the 1st to 5th and the 7th to 8th

Respondents). Decided on: 14.07.2021.

MOHAMMED LAFFAR, J.

The Petitioner in this application has invoked the supervisory writ

jurisdiction of this Court under Article 140 of the Constitution seeking

a writ of certiorari to quash the declaration marked P10 made by the 1st

Respondent under section 5 of the Land Acquisition Act, No. 09 of 1950

(hereinafter referred to as the Act).

When this matter was taken up for argument on 24.02.2021, all learned

Counsel moved that the judgment be delivered on the written

submissions that have already been tendered on behalf of the respective

parties.

According to the amended petition dated 03.12.2013, the Petitioner is

the owner of the land called Kettiganaelawahena alias Seeduwa Watte

alias Malpudanahena situated at Pitabeddara in Matara District in

extent of 13 Acres 1 Rood and 5 Perches by virtue of Deed of Transfer

No. 482 dated 26.06.1997 attested by A. Keerthiratne, Notary Public

(vide P1).

Page 4 of 10

The Petitioner states that the 3rd Respondent acting under section 2 of

the Act had issued a notice dated 17.01.2012 authorising the

Superintendent of Surveyor of Matara to enter the Petitioners land to

carry out a survey and demarcate 33.25 Perches from the land to be

acquired for a Public Purpose. The notice and the Survey Plan have been

marked as P2 and P3, respectively.

Thereafter, the 4th Respondent by a Gazette Notification dated

11.07.2012 published another notice under Section 4 of the Act stating

that a portion of the Petitioners land depicted in the said Plan P3 is to

be acquired for a Public Purpose and inform the public to tender

objections, if any, to the 3rd Respondent on or before 06.08.2102. This

notice has been marked as P4 by the Petitioner.

In response to the said notice P4, the Petitioner tendered her objections

to the 2nd Respondent by a letter dated 04.07.2012 (marked as P5).

Accordingly, the Petitioner had been requested to attend for an inquiry

by the 2nd Respondent on 20.11.2012 at Pitabeddara Divisional

Secretariate Office.

At the said inquiry, although the Petitioners claim and objections were

recorded, she was not satisfied the way that the said inquiry was

conducted by the inquiry officer i.e., Assistant Commissioner of Local

Government. Therefore, the Petitioner brought this fact to the notice of

the Commissioner of the Local Government by a letter dated 24.11.2012

(vide P7). Upon receiving the said complaint, the Assistant Secretary to

the Ministry of Local Government and Provincial Councils by his letter

dated 06.12.2012 requested the Assistant Commissioner of Local

Government to consider the facts stated in the Petitioners complaint

dated 24.01.2012 (vide P8).

Subsequently, on 27.07.2013, the 1st Respondent by an Extra Ordinary

Gazette Notification No. 1816/28 dated 27.06.2013 published a

declaration (P10) under section 5 of the Act stating that the Petitioners

Page 5 of 10

land which is described in the said schedule to the Notification will be

acquired for a public purpose.

The Petitioner further states that as per the documents P2 and P4 it has

been proposed that the said land acquisition is for a public purpose.

However, as per the document P3 it was clearly indicated that the

proposed land acquisition is for a road construction. In the Gazette

Notification P10 again it has been mentioned that the land acquisition

is for a public purpose.

In view of the above the Petitioner further alleges that the purpose for

the acquisition is ostensibly for a road development, and it appeared

that in fact, the true reason for acquisition is to provide the 6th

Respondent with easy access to his land through the Petitioners land.

The Petitioner, appending a document marked P11B the Final Village

Plan No. 6 submits that although there is an access road to reach the

6th Respondents house through the Public Road, it is illegal, arbitrary,

irregular, unfair, unreasonable, and contrary to the intention of the

legislature to acquire 32.5 Perches from the Petitioners land to provide

an alternative or shortcut roadway only to the 6th Respondent in the

guise of public purpose.

While admitting the fact that the said acquisition for a road

construction, the 7th and 8th Respondents state that the said roadway

described by the Petitioner, has not been used only by the 6th

Respondent, but also by them and their kins, several other families

residing in the same area and other many outsiders who come as

devotees to the Suniyam Dewalaya situated in the land of the 8th

Respondent which is being worshipped for more than 40 years1.

The 1st to 5th Respondents had filed their initial statement of objections

on 22.05.2014. In the objections, they admitted the ownership of the

1 Vide para. 10-13 of the written submissions filed by the 7th and 8th Respondents dated 28.06.2019.

Page 6 of 10

Petitioner to the subject land2 and concurring to the position taken up

by the 6th to 8th Respondents submit that the Pitabeddra Preshiya

Sabha, upon a resolution being passed, had requested that an access

road be constructed to gain access to the adjoining lands of members of

the public in the area. Therefore, they state that the acquisition process

was, accordingly, initiated as that request had involved a public

purpose.

However, the learned State Counsel for the 1st to 5th Respondents filing

their additional statement of objections dated 19.11.2018, submits that

the Petitioner has no proper title to the said land as prior approval of

the Divisional Secretary has not been obtained for the transfer of the

said property. Therefore, the 1st to 5th Respondents took up the position

that the Petitioner has no right to maintain this writ application.

This Court observes that even though the learned State Counsel for the

1st to 5th Respondents argues that the Petitioner has acquired her tittle

to the said land in an improper way as she failed to obtain a prior

approval of the relevant Divisional Secretariat, the Petitioner, in her

Petition, has sufficiently divulged the circumstances under which she

became the owner of the said land i.e., she produced the title deed P1

which is sufficient to her title to the land.

Having considered the vital factual matters and arguments that were

submitted by the respective parties, now I wish to deal with the issues

of law that have been raised in the written submissions filed on behalf

of the Petitioner.

The Land Acquisition Act clearly describes the steps that need to be

followed when acquiring a land. In terms of section 2(1), the Minister

decides and identifies the area and land that is needed for public

purpose. Thereafter, as per section 4(1), the Minister directs the

Acquiring Officer to serve a notice on the owner and another notice to

be exhibited in a conspicuous place on or near the land, thereby giving

2 Vide para. 3 of the statement of objections dated 21.05.2014.

Page 7 of 10

the owner, or any person who has an interest on the property, an

opportunity to object to the acquisition.

In the event an objection is made, as per section 4(4) of the Act, the

Minister will carry out a proper inquiry and come to a final conclusion.

The Ministers decision will be published in the Government Gazette and

will also be exhibited on or near the land confirming and establishing

the finality of his decision. This publication shall be construed as

definite evidence of the land being required for a public purpose, as per

section 5(2) of the Act, which remarkably states: A declaration made

under subsection (1) in respect of any land or servitude shall be conclusive

evidence that such land or servitude is needed for public purpose, whilst

section 7(2)(c) allows any person having an interest in the land to make

a claim for compensation.

The Petitioner in this application especially alleges that, the notice

issued by the Respondents merely states that the acquisition of the land

is for public purpose. The law pertaining to the issuance of notices is

found in section 2(1) and (2) of the Land Acquisition Act which reads as

follows:

1) where the Minister decides that land in any area is needed for

any public purpose, he may direct the acquiring officer of the

district in which that area lies to cause notice in accordance with

subsection (2) to be exhibited in some conspicuous places in that

area.

2) the notice referred to in subsection (1) shall be in the Sinhala,

Tamil and English languages and shall state that the land in

that area specified in the notice is required for a public purpose

and that all or any of the acts authorized by subsection (3) may

be done on any land in that area in order to investigate the

suitability of that land for that public purpose.

Page 8 of 10

In this matrix, Justice Mark Fernandos broadened illumination of

section 2(2) of the Act in the case of Manel Fernando and Another vs.

D.M Jayarathne, Minister of Agriculture and Lands3, is noteworthy:

The minister cannot order the issue of a Section 2 notice unless

he has a public purpose in mind. Is there any valid reason why

he should withhold this from the owners who may be affected?

Section 2(2) requires the notice to state that one or more acts may

be done in order to investigate the suitability of that land for that

public purpose: obviously that public purpose cannot be an

undisclosed one. This implies that the purpose must be

disclosed. From a practical point of view, if an officer acting under

Section 2(3)(f) does not know the public purpose, he cannot fulfil

his duty of ascertaining whether any particular land is suitable

for that purpose.

It is not in dispute that lands are acquired under the provisions of the

Land Acquisition Act for the benefit of the public. However, in the

process of carrying out greater good for the public of the country, one

must not unjustifiably neglect the lawful owner of the land. It would be

overly harsh to forget the ties a landowner has to his property. Therefore,

it is necessary for the Minister and/or any relevant authority, to have a

clear and distinct public purpose for which the acquisition is

commissioned.

In the event a Minister or any Government officials are not aware of the

true public purpose of acquiring the land then the act of acquiring the

property should be viewed through a scrutiny by the Courts. As correctly

observed by Shiranee Thilakawardena, J. in Kapugeekiyana vs. Hon.

Janaka Bandara Tennakone, Minister of Land and 6 Others4,

acquiring properties under deception and pretense or for a potential and

non-existent future public purpose will be unlawful. Importance and

3 [2000] 1 Sri LR 112. 4 [2013] 1 Sri LR 192

Page 9 of 10

necessity in accordance with the provisions of this Act should be given

to the existence of the knowledge of the genuine public purpose the land

would be put to use and to disclose such purpose to the landowner at

the time of acquiring the property.

In Kapugeekiyanas case, the Supreme Court had observed that a

document issued by the Divisional Secretary of Kaduwela dated

18.09.1998 which clearly stated that the land is required for the public

purpose of urban development. Therefore, the Court found that the

said purpose as a proportionately sufficient explanation for the acquiring

of the land under the provisions of the Act. However, in the case in hand,

although in the Surveyor Plan P3 it was indicated by the Superintend of

Survey, Matara that the proposed land acquisition is for a road

construction ( ), in my view, this

indication is not amount to a proportionately sufficient explanation given

by an appropriate authority as observed by the Supreme Court in

Kapugeekiyanas case.

Further, 1st to 5th Respondents, in their written submission, citing a

judgment namely, D.H. Gunasekara vs. Minister of Land and

Agriculture5, argued that the compulsory acquisition of a land by a

declaration of the Minister under section 5 of the Act that a land is

acquired for a public purpose cannot be questioned in law. The publication

in the Gazette that the land in dispute is acquired for the public purpose

is conclusive evidence that the land was needed for a public purpose in

terms of section 5(2) of the Act6. I am mindful of the fact that this position

has been discussed in numerous decisions of this Court and the

Supreme Court7. According to section 5(2) of the Act, a declaration made

under section 5(1) shall be conclusive evidence that such land is needed

for a public purpose and in terms of section 5(3), the publication of a

5 [1963] 65 NLR 119. 6 Vide Written Submissions dated 28.06.2021 filed the 1st to 5th Respondents, p. 7. 7 See, Gunasekera vs. Minister of Lands 65 NLR 119, Gunasinghe vs. Hon. Gamini Dissanayake, and Others [1994] Sri LR 132.

Page 10 of 10

declaration under section 5(1) in the Gazette shall be conclusive

evidence of the fact that such declaration was duly made.

However, I am unable to agree with the above contention of the 1st-5th

Respondents that the Ministers decision to acquire a land can never be

challenged in a Court of Law. A Minister does not have the unfettered

right to acquire land without specifying a public purpose. Nor does a

Minister has a right to acquire a land and utilize it for purposes other

than a specified clear public purpose8.

Therefore, it is apparent that the failure to specify the public purpose in

the section 2 Notice - P2 in respect of the land is fatal to the acquisition

proceedings. Accordingly, the entire steps that are followed by issuing

the Notice P2, also fatal to the acquisition proceedings.

For the forgoing reasons, I make order allowing this application as per

sub paragraph (b) of the prayer to the Petition. Accordingly, writ of

certiorari is issued as per the prayer (b) to the Petition without costs.

Application allowed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.

K. K. A. V. SWARNADHIPATHI, J. I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.

8 Vide Mahinda Katugaha vs. Minister of Lands and Land Development and Others [2008] 1 Sri LR 285.