I I J

1

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Patakaragedera Kirineris

of 221, Makulugalla,

Pallepola, ( Matale District)

C.A.No.972/99 (F)

D.C.Matale P /1654

Substituted-Plaintirr- Appellant

Vs,

1. Daulkaragedera Siriya ( deceased)

2.Daulkaragedera Abiththa

3. Daulkaragedera Sirimalee

4. Daulkaragedera Carolis

All df Weragama, Kaikawala.

Defendants -Respondents

1A. Viyannala Hedera Thilak

Karunaratne,

No. 471/1, Kaineka

Kaikawala

lB. Dikpitye Hedera Jayantha

Sirisumana

2

No.4714/2/B, Kaineka,

Kaikawala

Substituted-Derendants-

Respondents.

Patakaragedera leelawathie

Patakaragedera Somadasa,

Patakaragedera Sarasema

Patakaragedera Karunawqthie

Patakaragedera Gunadasa.

Respondents.

Before M.M.A.Gaffoor,J.

Counsel Daya Guruge with Rohitha Wimalaweera for

the Plaintiff-Appellant

M.C.M.Muneer for the Defendant-Respondent

Written submissions filed on Substituted Plaintiff-Appellant

on 24/11/2017

Substituted Plaintiff-Respondent

on 06/09/2016

Decided on 06/03/2018

ti! t,

", J. I

I il

t

3

M.M.A,Gaffoor,J.

This appeal preferred to this Court from the impugned

judgment of Matale District Court bearing Case No.1654 jP. The

above partition action has been filed by the plaintiff, in respect of

land called Sellegewatta as described in the plaint.

The trial proceeded with 3 admissions namely:

a. Jurisdiction.

b Corpus as described in the plaint as described by the

Licensed Surveyor M.Rajasekera in his survey plan No.3381 of

16.07.1995.

and

c. All contending parties admitted that the original owner as

Kaluwa.

Plaintiff raised issues 1 & 2 and the Defendant raised issues

3-7 respectively:

The learned District Judge after trial delivered the said

judgment on 28th May 1999, in favour of the substituted plaintifi-

Appellant. Being aggrieved by the said judgment lA and lB

defendant-respondents has preferred this appeal. It will be seen

4

that at the close of the case both plaintiff and defendants has

passed away and they had been properly substituted.

The main contentions of the defendant-respondent are.

a. The plaintiff Davulkara Gethera Pinsiri was living in Ampare

which she admitted in cross - examination and she never was in

possession of the undivided share in the corpus. The evidence of

plaintiffs son Kirineris admitted that the defendants was in

possession but he used to visit the land intermittently.

b. The evidence of the License Surveyor did not reveal th~..t he

plaintiff was living in the co - owned property. ( pages 71-72

appeal brief)

c. There has been no fence or clear demarcation of boundaries'

as described by the License Surveyor.

d. The Defendant's contended that they too had title to the part

of the land and had uninterrupted adverse possession since 1940.

e. The defendant called witness Tikiribanda who lives V4 mile

from the corpus ( page 95-97 appeal brief) who corroborated the

position of the defendant.

,'/

'/

5

f. Witness Amarasekera gave evidence and said that he is living

in the adjacent land in dispute. ( Page 100 appeal briefl and the

case was closed for the defendant.

g. The two witnesses who gave evidence in favour of the

plaintiff admitted that they had no clear knowledge about the

disputed land ( page 112)

h. No evidence had been adduced that the plaintiff possessed

the co-owned property or she enjoyed the fruits thereof.

i. Evidence revealed that the plaintiff has lest the village ill

which the disputed land is situated, forty years ago.( page 11~)

j. Although the plaintiff has asserted that she had enjoyed the

fruits of the land this fact had not been established by evidence.

k. The License Surveyor in his plans " X" and ''Y'' had clearly

stated data there were no boundaries seen on the land in dispute.

1. When the preliminary survey being done, although the

defendant was building new structure no objections were taken

up by the plaintiff.

'/

6

In his order the learned Trial Judge too had observed the

undernoted important fact viz:

a. Although the plaintiff has stated that she has 2 brothers but in her

amended plaint she has been silent on this issue (page. 108)

b. The fact that the Plaintiff cannot find out the residences of

the above two brothers their shares should be un-allotted.

(page 119)

c. The plaintiff has failed to tender a pedigree along with the

amended plaint ( Page 110)

d. The defendant's contended that they too had title to the part

of the land and had uninterrupted adverse possession since

1940.

e. The defendant called witness Tikiriband who lives V4 mile

from the corpus (pages 95-97 appeal brief) who corroborated

the position of the defendant.

f. Witness Amarasekaera gave evidence and said that he is

living in the adjacent land in dispute (page 100 appeal brief)

and the case was closed for the defendant.

It is to be noted that a very brief written submission has been

tendered on behalf of the substituted-plaintiff-appellant. The main

, ( ./ f

'. ,.

7

contention of the appellant was that the felling of a jack tree cannot be

considered as an overt act of dispossession of the plaintiff. In this

context, if the said act is considered alone without considering the

cumulative effect of the other evidence tendered by the defendants and

the counter evidence of the plaintiff, the cutting of the jack tree alone

would not constitute an overt act. It is to be noted that the learned

District Judge had observed the witnesses and their demeanor and had

evaluated evidence.

Presumption of Ouster.

The case of Karunawathie & :2 other Vs.Gunadasa (1996)

2SLR 406 has some relevance to the issues in the case in point.

Senanayake,J., in the above judgment observed thus:

((In considering whether or not a presumption of ouster should be

drawn by reason of long continued possession alone) of the property

owned in common) it is relevant to consider".

a. The income derived from the property

b. The value of the property and

c. The relationship of the co-owners and where they reside in

,., relation to the situation of the property.( emphasis supplied)

I,

t I !

8

( It has been proved that the Plaintiff reluctantly admitted

that she lives in Ampare)

In the case of Rajapakse Vs. Hmdrick Sigho 61 NLR Page

35 the court considered the judgments in Corea V. Lsseris Appuhamy

1911 15 NLR 65 and Cadija Umma Vs. Don Manis 193840 NLR 392

- Justice Basnayake, CJ observed thus:

" The law being as stated above the only question that arises

for decision in this case is whether the evidence discloses an ouster of

the plaintiffs by the defendants and whether that ouster continued

for a period of over ten years. The expression " ouster" which is used

in Corea's case and later in Cadija Umma's case is a concept of

English Law and we must to that system of Law in order to ascertain

its meaning" Doe Vs. Prosser, Cowp. 217 and 98 ER 1052 and

Peacable Vs. Read 1 East 569.102 ER 220.

The learned CJ continued and opined thus:-

The expression "actual ouster" needs explanation as it is an

expression used by both Lord Mansfeild and Lord Kenyon in the

cases referred to above I cannot do better than explain it in the very

words of Lord Mansfeild.

,',

.",

I! I I

II

9

"Some ambiguity seems to have arisen from the term "actual

ouster" as if it meant some act accompanied by real force, and as if a

turning out by the shoulders were necessary. "But that is not so (

Emphasis added)".

In the instant case the evidence that the plaintiff was not in

occupation of the land, but the defendants were in occupation of the

whole land and also took its produce to the exclusion of the plaintiff

and their predecessor to title, and gave them no share of the produce,

did not act from which an acknowledgement of a right existing in the

plaintiff fairly and naturally be inferred, is overwhelming.

Further, it is to be noted that there are plethora of judgments

pronounced in Superior Courts, whether it had been observed that

Appellate Courts are always slow to interfere with the decisions

arrived at by the trial Judge as far as the facts of the case is

concerned. This position has been applied and accepted in the

undernoted decisions:

"Ranawaka Arachchuige Nriugette AZwis Vs. AZZen Margret

WiJetunga Be Appeal 343/14 decided on 13/12/2017, where justice

Buvaneka AZuvihare observe thus:

)

fr

., I

IIf 1f

i I. I ! f

fI

10

" In the case of Mac Groddie Vs. Mac Graddie 3013 UK SC 58 (2013) 1

WLR 2477, commenting on the approach of the Appeal Courts to a

finding of fact, the Supreme of the United Kingdom held. " it was long

settle principle, stated in domestic and wider common law

jurisdictions that an appellate court should not interfere with the trial

judge's conclusions on the primary facts unless satisfied that he was

plainly wrong".

This principle had been upheld in-

"Alwis Vs. Priyasena Femando1993 (1) SLR at page 119 , where

His Lordship G.P.S. held thus;

"It is well established that findings of primary facts by a trial

judge who hears and sees the witnesses are not lightly

disturbed on appeal".

These views are supported by the undernoted decisions;

Fradd Vs. Brown & Co Ltd.20 NLR 282

De Silva and Others Vs. Senaviratne and Others 1981 (2)

SLR 8.

D.S. Mahavithan Vs. Commissioner of fnlans Revenue 64 NLR217

.,

I I ,, !

11

S.D.M.Farook Vs. L.B.Finance (CA 44/98, CA Minues of 15.3.2013).

W.M.Gunathilake Vs. M.M.S. Pushpakumara ( CA 151/98 CA

Minutes of 09.05.2013.

In this stated of evidence we do not see how we can disturb

the findings of the Leaned District Judge though undoubtedly there are

statements in his judgment which invites criticism. Those question do

arise but on the facts of this case there is no difficulty in resolving them

in favour of the substituted defendants.

Having examined the evidence pertaining to the facts of this

case it is impossible for this Court to come to a reasonable conclusion

that the judgment is perverse.

Appeal is dismissed without costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL.

'\

I I

{ i

II