1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979, read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal Case No.

CA/HCC/ 0416/2017 Nanayakkara Liyanage Thusara Viromi

High Court of Colombo

Case No. HCB/1828/2010

1st Accused-Appellant

vs.

The Director General

Commission to Investigate

Allegations of Bribery or Corruption

No.36, Malalasekera Mawatha,

Colomb0-07.

Complainant-Respondent

2 | P a g e

BEFORE : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

P. Kumararatnam, J.

COUNSEL : Gayan Perera with Praba Perera and

Panchali Ekanayake for the

Appellant.

Ruvini Wickramasinghe,

Deputy Director General of the

Bribery Commission for the

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 31/10/2022

DECIDED ON : 02/12/2022

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named 1st Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted along with the 2nd accused by the Director General

of the Bribery Commission in the High Court of the Western Province holden

in Colombo on the following charges:

3 | P a g e

1. On or about the 03rd of January 2008 at Colombo the Appellant

having solicited a gratification of Rs.500000/- from a person by

the name of Herath Mudiyanselage Lalija Herath in order to get

a benefit from the Government, that is to assist him in

proceeding to Canada to get a Canadian job opportunity through

Sri Lanka Foreign Services Agency which is an offence

punishable under Section 20(b) (iv) of the Bribery Act.

2. At the same time and place and in the same transaction referred

to in the first charge the Appellant having accepted a

gratification of Rs.300000/- from a person by the name of

Herath Mudiyanselage Lalija Herath in order to get a benefit

from the Government, that is to assist him to proceed to Canada

to get a Canadian job opportunity through Sri Lanka Foreign

Services Agency an offence punishable under Section 20 (b) (vi)

of the Bribery Act.

The 2nd accused who was the Secretary to the Chairman of the Sri Lanka

Foreign Employment Bureau Agency (Pvt) Ltd was indicted for aiding and

abetting the Appellant to accept the gratification of Rs.300000/- from Herath

Mudiyanselage Lalija Herath.

At the very out set the 2nd accused had pleaded guilty and she was sentenced

to 01-year rigorous imprisonment suspended for 05 years with a fine of

Rs.5000/- with a default sentence of 03 months simple imprisonment.

After the trial, the Appellant was found guilty for both counts and the

Learned Judge of the High Court of Colombo has imposed the following

sentences on the Appellant on 28/09/2017:

1. For every count a fine of Rs.5,000/- with a default sentence of

01-month rigorous imprisonment imposed.

4 | P a g e

2. For every count 5 years rigorous imprisonment imposed.

Further the Learned High Court Judge has ordered the sentence

to run concurrent to each other.

3. In addition, a fine of Rs.300000/- has been imposed with a

default sentence of 06 months rigorous imprisonment.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and the sentence the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent to argue this matter in his absence due to the Covid 19

pandemic. At the hearing, the Appellant was waiting outside the Court

premises due to Covid 19 restrictions.

On behalf of the Appellant the following Grounds of Appeal were raised.

1. The Learned Trial Judge has failed to evaluate or take in to

consideration the major infirmities of the case of the prosecution.

2. The Learned Trial Judge has failed to evaluate the major

contradictions, between the evidence of the complainant and that of

the officers of the Bribery Commission who participated in the raid in

the alleged incident of accepting the said gratification from the first

witness.

3. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to give the benefit of doubt

created by the uncorroborated evidence of the driver of the three-

wheeler.

4. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to consider that the evidence

available in the present case is not sufficient to convict the accused

appellants under solicitation and acceptance of the gratification.

Background of the case.

PW1 is a police officer who was attached to the Commission to Investigate

Allegations of Bribery or Corruption when this raid was conducted. He had

received a complaint from a person called Gamini Perera stating that the

5 | P a g e

Appellant was soliciting a bribe amounting to Rs.500000/- in order to assist

him to obtain a Canadian job opportunity through the Sri Lanka Foreign

Services Agency. As the Appellant asked PW2 Gamini Perera to bring any

other person who wishes to proceed to Canada under the same modus

operandi, PW2 had passed the information to the Bribery Commission who

organized the raid by using PW1 as the decoy. Accordingly, PW2 had

accompanied PW1 and had introduced him to the Appellant as his friend to

get the assistance from the Appellant to fly to Canada. On the day of the raid,

both PW1 and PW2 had met the Appellant at the Foreign Employment Agency

at Kirimandala Mawatha. The Appellant had directed PW2 to proceed

upstairs on his own of the said office and to meet the 2nd accused who aided

and abetted the Appellant to accept the gratification Rs.300000/- from PW1.

As per the instructions and directions, PW2 had come downstairs and met

the Appellant in a three-wheeler and had handed over Rs.300000/- to the

Appellant inside the three-wheeler. The Appellant was caught red handed

along with the money which had been provided by the Bribery Officers.

The prosecution had called five witnesses and marked productions P1-8 and

closed their case. When the defence was called, the Appellant made a dock

statement and closed the case.

As the 1st, 2nd and 4th grounds of appeal are interconnected, these grounds

will be considered together in this judgment. The Counsel for the Appellant

contends that the Learned Trial Judge has failed to evaluate the infirmities,

contradictions and sufficiency of the evidence in the prosecution case.

In a criminal trial, it is incumbent on the prosecution to prove the case

beyond reasonable doubt. There is no burden on the Appellant to prove his

innocence. This is the Golden Thread that was discussed in Woolmington

v. DPP [1935] A.C.462. In this case Viscount Sankey J held that:

Throughout the web of the English Criminal Law one golden thread is

always to be seen, that it is the duty of the prosecution to prove the

6 | P a g e

prisoners guilt If, at the end of and on the whole of the case, there

is a reasonable doubt, created by the evidence given by either the

prosecution or the prisoner...the prosecution has not made out the

case and the prisoner is entitled to an acquittal.

After receiving the complaint from PW1, the Bribery Officials had

meticulously planned the raid and arrested the Appellant. The Learned High

Court Judge in his judgment carefully considered the evidence led by both

parties to come to his conclusion. He had considered the inter se and per se

contradictions of prosecution witnesses and held that the contradictions

highlighted are not forceful enough to undermine the prosecution case.

Hence, he was satisfied with the credibility of the witnesses who had given

evidence on behalf of the prosecution.

Furthermore, the evidence presented by the prosecution is overwhelming. No

contradictory position existed among the prosecution witnesses. As the

prosecution had adduced cogent, consistent and believable evidence it

passes the probability test. Therefore, I conclude that the grounds raised

under 1st, 2nd and 4th are devoid of any merit.

In the 3rd ground of appeal, the Counsel for the Appellant contended that the

Learned High Court Judge has failed to give the benefit of the doubt created

by the uncorroborated evidence of the driver of the three-wheeler.

It is a well-established rule of law that it is not necessary to call a certain

number of witnesses to prove a fact. However, if court is not impressed with

the cogency and the convincing nature of the evidence of the sole testimony

of the witnesses, it is incumbent on the prosecution to corroborate the

evidence as stated in Sunil v. AG [1999] 3 SLR 191 where it was held:

It is trite law that the trial judge who hears a bribery trial is entitled to

convict on the sole testimony of a prosecution witness without any

corroboration provided he is impressed with the cogency, convincing

7 | P a g e

character of the evidence and the testimonial trustworthiness of the sole

witness.

It is an incorrect statement of the law to hold that a reasonable doubt

arises on the mere fact that the prosecution case rested on the

uncorroborated evidence of a solitary prosecution witness.

According to PW4, the three-wheeler driver, on the date of the incident the

Appellant had come to the Foreign Services Agency at Kirimandala Mawatha,

Narahenpita entered the office and returned in about 30 minutes time and

got in to the three-wheeler. Once she sat inside the three-wheeler two

persons had come beside and spoken to her. During the conversation the

Appellant had with the two persons, he overheard that the Appellant

inquiring as to whether the money was counted.

PW1 and PW2 had gone up to the three-wheeler to hand over the money to

the Appellant. According to PW1, he was the person who gave the money to

the Appellant. Both PW1 and PW2 in their evidence corroborated the

evidence of PW4 very well. Further, without receiving money, the Appellant

would not have asked whether the money was counted. PW4 is an

independent witness who knew the Appellant for about two years before this

incident. Considering the evidence of PW4, there is no doubt created on the

prosecution case. Hence, this ground also sans any merit.

The Appellant in her dock statement stated that two unknown persons had

dropped a cash bundle on her lap when she was seated in the three-wheeler.

But there is not an iota of evidence which surfaced to corroborate that either

PW2 or the officers from the Bribery Commission had any sinister motive to

fabricate a Bribery case against the Appellant. Unless the Appellant

communicated her movement to PW2, they would not have gone to the

Foreign Services Agency at Kirimandala Mawatha on that day on that

particular time. Further, the independent witness, PW4 had confirmed that

the Appellant had gone inside the Foreign Services Agency at Kirimandala

8 | P a g e

Mawatha 30 minutes before she was arrested. Hence, the position taken by

the Appellant during the trial had strengthened the prosecution case.

The prosecution had proven that the Appellant had committed the above-

mentioned wrongful acts not for the purpose of doing an official act but for

the preservation or abuse of official powers.

When considering the totality of the evidence it is clear that the prosecution

has proven the charges in the indictment against the Appellant beyond

reasonable doubt.

Therefore, the appeal is dismissed and the conviction and the sentence

affirmed.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send a copy of this judgment to the

High Court of Colombo along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL