==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 10

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Section 320 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 16 of 1979.

The Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General‟s Department, Colombo 12. Court of Appeal Complainant Case No. CA HCC 180/2025

Vs.

High Court of Gampaha Case No. HC/01/2018 Mathagadheera Arachchige Saliya Kumara Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Mathagadheera Arachchige Saliya Kumara Accused-Appellant Vs. The Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General‟s Department, Colombo 12.

Complainant-Respondent

Page 2 of 10

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran, J. Amal Ranaraja, J.

Counsel: Maldini Herath for the Accused-Appellant. Akila Dalpadatu, S.C. for the Respondent.

Argued on: 11.02.2026 Judgment on: 17.03.2026

JUDGMENT

AMAL RANARAJA, J.

1. The accused appellant hereinafter referred to as the appellant has been

indicted in the High Court of Gampaha in High Court case number HC

01/2018.

The charges in the indictment are as follows:

Charge 01

That on or about the period between September 09, 2011, and August

30, 2015, the appellant deposited a sum of Rs. 8354869.46 to the bank

account bearing No. 2632271780215 of Pan Asia Bank in Kadawatha,

knowing or having reason to believe that such money was derived or

realized, directly or indirectly from the trafficking of heroin or from

proceeds of such illegal activity in violation of the Poisons, Opium and

Dangerous Drugs Act, and thereby committed an offence punishable in

terms of section 3(1) of the Prevention Of Money Laundering Act No.5 of

2006 as amended.

Page 3 of 10

Charge 02

That on or about March 03, 2011, the appellant purchased a land worth

Rs. 1300000.00 as described in the schedule to Deed of Transfer bearing

No. 2797 attested by Ratnayake Mudiyanselage Gunasekara Banda

Notary Public in Kadawatha, knowing or having reason to believe that

such money was derived or realized, directly or indirectly from the

trafficking of heroin or from proceeds of such illegal activity in violation

of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Act, and thereby committed

an offence punishable in terms of section 3(1) of the Prevention Of Money

Laundering Act No.5 of 2006 as amended.

2. At the conclusion of the trial, the learned High Court Judge has

convicted the appellant of the charges and sentenced him to five years

simple imprisonment each in respect of the first and second charges. It

has also been directed that the substantial terms of imprisonment shall

run consecutively.

3. The appellant aggrieved by the conviction, disputed judgment together

with the sentencing order has preferred the instant appeal to this Court.

4. Money laundering is just not a financial crime, it is the clandestine

lifeblood of a vast, illicit global economy. It is the process by which

criminals disguise the illegal origins of their funds making „dirty money‟

appear „clean‟ or „legitimate‟. This process enables criminals ranging from

drug traffickers to fraudsters, terrorists to corrupt officials to utilize their

gains without revealing their unlawful sources, thereby protecting

themselves from detection and prosecution and ultimately legitimizing

their criminal enterprises.

5. The fundamental purpose of money laundering is two-fold i.e.

concealment and legitimacy. Criminals generate vast sums of cash or

Page 4 of 10

other assets through activities like drug trafficking, extortion, fraud or

bribery. These funds are problematic because their volume or unusual

nature can draw unwanted attention from the law enforcement and

financial regulators.

6. In such circumstances, money laundering provides a mechanism to:

i. Disconnect the funds from the criminal activity that generated

them.

ii. Hide the true beneficial owner of the funds.

iii. Allows criminals to spend, invest or move their wealth freely within

the legitimate financial system without suspicion.

7. Without money laundering, the profits of crime would be largely

unusable, trapping criminals in a cycle where their illicit gains are a

liability rather than an asset.

8. Money laundering is typically understood as a three stage process.

i. Placement – Criminals aim to convert bulk cash into less

suspicious financial instruments. Common methods include

depositing small non reportable amounts into multiple accounts or

directly depositing into businesses that handle a lot of cash like

restaurants, casinos or car washes. The goal is to move the money

away from its physical form and into digital realm or other assets.

ii. Layering – This stage involves creating a deliberately confusing

trait to obscure the origin and ownership of the funds. Techniques

include transferring money electronically through multiple bank

accounts across different jurisdictions, investing in complex

financial products, etc. The aim is to make it difficult for

Page 5 of 10

investigators to trace the funds back to their illegal origins, adding

layers of uncertainty.

iii. Integration – At this point, the funds would have been sufficiently

distanced from their criminal origins and would have acquired a

face of legitimacy. Criminals can thereafter spend, invest or use

these funds openly.

9. The creativity of money launderers is constantly evolving but some

common methods and vehicles include:

i. Shell companies and trusts, i.e., legal entities used to

obscure ownership and facilitate transfers.

ii. Real estate, i.e., buying and selling properties often at

inflated or deflated prices or using cash.

iii. Casinos, i.e., converting cash into chips, gambling minimally

and then cashing out.

iv. Trade-based laundering, i.e., manipulating invoices for goods

and services to move goods.

v. Bulk cash smuggling, i.e., physically transporting large sums

of cash across borders.

vi. Art and antiques, i.e., high value, easily transportable assets

with subjective pricing.

vii. Crypto-currencies, i.e., while transparent on ledgers, the

anonymity of the users can be exploited.

viii. Professional services, i.e., using lawyers, accountants or real

estate agents who may be complicit or unwitting.

10. In many jurisdictions, the “presumption of ill-gotten assets” (also known

as the presumption of illicit enrichment or unexplained wealth) is a legal

mechanism designed to counter money laundering, by placing the

Page 6 of 10

burden on the asset holder to prove the legitimate origin of their

property. This approach addresses the difficulty prosecutors face in

linking assets to the criminal act or the unlawful activity.

11. Laws such as the Prevention Of Money Laundering Act in various

countries, establish that if a person holds assets that cannot be

accounted for through their known income or legal receipts, it is

presumed, until proven otherwise, that the property is derived from

unlawful activity. This applies to both movable and immovable assets

including cash, real estate, jewelry and digital/electronic instruments.

12. This is not an absolute conviction, it is a rebuttable presumption,

meaning the accused has the opportunity to prove on a balance of

probability, that the assets were acquired through legal means. The

presumption is triggered when a person‟s wealth or property acquisition

excess his lawful income.

13. Law enforcement can request an individual to explain the source of his

property. Failure to provide a satisfactory explanation leads to a

presumption that the property is ill-gotten. Unlawful activity indicators

include transactions that cannot be linked to a known, legitimate

business or income source.

14. Having discussed the concept of money laundering and the legal

mechanism to counter it, I shall now examine the relevant provisions of

the Prevention Of Money Laundering Act No. 05 of 2006 as amended.

15. Section 3 of the Prevention Of Money Laundering Act No. 5 of 2006 (as

amended) reads as follows:

(1) Any person who-

Page 7 of 10

(a) engages directly or indirectly in any transaction in relation to any

property which is derived or realised, directly or indirectly, from

any unlawful activity or from the proceeds of any unlawful

activity;

(b) receives, possesses, conceals, disposes of, or brings into Sri

Lanka, transfers out of Sri Lanka, or invests in Sri Lanka, any

property which is derived or realised, directly or indirectly, from

any unlawful activity or from the proceeds of any unlawful

activity,

knowing or having reason to believe that such property is derived

or realized, directly or indirectly from any unlawful activity, or

from the proceeds of any unlawful activity shall be guilty of the

offence of money laundering and shall on conviction after trial

before the High Court be liable to a fine which shall be not less

than the value of the property in respect of which the offence is

committed and not more than three times the value of such

property, or to rigorous imprisonment for a period of not less than

five years and not exceeding twenty years, or to both such fine

and imprisonment.

(1A) The assets of any person found guilty of the offence of money

laundering under this section shall be liable to forfeiture in terms of

Part II of this Act.

(2) Any person who attempts or conspires to commit the offence of

money laundering, or aids or abets, the commission of the offence of

money laundering shall be guilty of an offence under this Act and

shall be liable after trial before the High Court to be punished with

the same punishment as is specified for the offence of money

Page 8 of 10

laundering. In this subsection "abet" shall have the same meaning

as in sections 100 and 101 of the Penal Code.

(3) For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that a conviction

for the commission of the unlawful activity shall not be necessary for

the proof of the offence under the provisions of this Act.

16. Section 4 of the Prevention Of Money Laundering Act No. 5 of 2006 (as

amended) reads as follows:

For the purposes of any proceedings under this Act, it shall be deemed

until the contrary is proved, that any movable or immovable property

acquired by a person has been derived or realized directly or indirectly

from any unlawful activity, or are the proceeds of any unlawful activity,

if such property-

(a) being money, cannot be or could not have been-

(i) part of the known income or receipts of such person; or

(ii) money to which his known income or receipts has or had been

converted; or

(b) being property other than money, cannot be or could not have been-

(i) property acquired with any part of his known income or

receipts; and

(ii) property which is or was part of his known income or receipts;

and

(iii) property to which is any part of his known income or receipts

has or had been converted.

17. Section 4 of the Prevention Of Money Laundering Act No. 5 of 2006 (as

amended) includes a provision that any property acquired by a person

Page 9 of 10

that cannot be a part of his known income or receipts, it is presumed to

be from an unlawful activity until the contrary is proved. Further, the

aspects of the legal presumption include:

i. The law deems that if the property is money, it to be derived from

an unlawful activity, not a part of the known income and if the

property is one other than money, that the property acquired by

person is derived from an unlawful activity, if it cannot be

accounted for by a known income. The burden of proof shifts to the

person to prove that the assets were acquired legally.

ii. It is not necessary to convict the individual of a specific predicate

offence to seize the assets. The focus is on the inability to explain

the source of the wealth.

iii. If the presumption is not rebutted, assets as subject to forfeiture.

iv. This typically applies to any property movable or immovable,

including cash, real estate or financial instruments.

18. In the present case, the prosecution has adduced evidence of the

appellant‟s known income, i.e., declared sources of income. Having

carefully evaluated the material, the learned High Court Judge has found

that the prosecution has established that the investments particularized

in the indictment could not have been funded from the appellant‟s

known income.

19. The learned High Court Judge has then addressed the second issue,

whether the appellant has on a balance of probability, rebutted that

inference by demonstrating an alternative, legitimate source of funds.

The learned High Court Judge has decided that the appellant has failed

to discharge that burden. His reasons are set out at length in the

judgment and they are detailed, logical and in no way perverse.

Page 10 of 10

20. In a matter of this nature, the appellant must prove the alleged facts on a

balance of probability, i.e., that the occurrence of those facts is more

probable than not. Here, the narrative of the appellant has not been

corroborated by contemporaneous documentation, e.g., bank statements,

tax returns, etc.

21. On the totality of the evidence adduced at the trial, the learned High

Court Judge has not been persuaded that the appellant‟s version is more

plausible than the prosecution‟s. Accordingly, the appellant has failed to

discharge the requisite burden of proof.

22. In those circumstances, I am not inclined to interfere with the conviction,

disputed judgment, together with the sentencing order and I proceed to

affirm the same. I dismiss the appeal and make no order regarding costs.

Appeal dismissed.

23. The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court in Gampaha for compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

B. SASI MAHENDRAN, J.

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal