Page 1 of 4

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA Application No:

CA Bail 05/2021

M C Batticaloa Case No:

B 947 /19

In the matter of an application for

bail in terms of section 10 (1) of

Assistance to and Protection of

Victims of Crime and Witnesses Act,

No. 04 of 2015.

Officer in Charge.

Victims of Crime and Witnesses Assistance and Protection Division.

No.09, Mihindu Mawatha,

Colombo 12.

Complainant

Vs.

1.Nithyanandan Gokulan.

2.Poopalapillai Pirasanthan

Suspect.

AND NOW BETWEEN

Poopalapillai Pirasanthan

No.57, Rajadurai Village,

Aarayampathi.

Presently at the Batticaloa Remand

Prison.

Page 2 of 4

Before Menaka Wijesundera J.

Neil Iddawala J.

Counsel Ranil Samarasooriya with

Shifan Maharoof and

Rajinda Kandegedara for

2nd Suspect Petitioner.

Kavishka Rajakaruna, SC

For the Respondents.

2nd Suspect Petitioner

Vs.

1.Officer in Charge

Victims of Crime Witnesses

Assistance and Protection Division,

No. 09, Mihindu Mawatha,

Colombo 12.

Complainant Respondent

2. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents

Page 3 of 4

Argued On 15.06.21

Decided On 06.07.2021

MANAKA WIJESUNDERA J.

The instant application for bail has been filed under the Assistance to and

Protection of Victims of Crime and Witnesses Act no 4 of 2015.

A person by the name of S. Sivapakyam had complained against the petitioner

on 23.09.19 that she had been threatened by the petitioner and a person by the

name of Kalidasa to the effect that not to give evidence in a case pending before

the magistrates court, somewhere in March 2019.

Thereafter investigations have commenced and facts have been reported to the

magistrate on 1.10.19 and a further report also had been filed pertaining to the

1st suspect and on obtaining advice regarding the 1st suspect the Hon Attorney

General had advised the petitioner to be produced under the above mentioned

act and it had been done so on 12.11.20, and the petitioner had been in remand

since then.

The position of the petitioner is that the instant investigation is based on a

belated complaint and the statements recorded during the investigations are

contradictory to each other.

Under the provisions of the act under which the petitioner had been produced

in court, if the petitioner is to be released on bail the petitioner has to establish

exceptional conditions. It is so enumerated under section 10 (1) (a) of the said

act and the term exceptional has been defined in many a decided orders of this

court. In the instant case the initial complaint had been lodged in 2019

September for an incident which is supposed to have taken place in 2019 March,

Page 4 of 4

and furthermore the counsel appearing before this court did not enlighten this

court as to whether indictment is being considered for the instant matter.

The objective of this act is set in section 2 and it envisages a situation where it is

to ensure the rights of the victims and witnesses but at the same time section

10(2) of the act has given thought to the rights of the accused as well because it

is said to conclude the trials without delay and with special priority. Hence in the

instant case the complaint is belated and the date of filling indictment against

the petitioner is also not very clear hence this court is of the opinion that it is

only fair and prudent to enlarge the petitioner on bail.

Hence the petitioner is enlarged on following conditions of bail,

1) A cash bail of Rs. 25000/,

2) Two sureties to the value of Rs. 100000/ each

3) The petitioner to report on every Sunday of the month to the relevant police

station

4) The petitioner is severely warned not to interfere with the complainant or her

family members if so the instant order for bail stand cancelled.

The registrar of this court is hereby directed to convey the instant order to the

relevant Magistrates Court.

Judge of the Court Of Appeal.

I agree.

Neil Iddawala J.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.