==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Orders in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus

under Article 140 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Raj Rajaratnam,

No. 60, Sutton Place, Apartment 18BN,

New York, New York 10022,

United States of America.

PETITIONER

CA (Writ) App. No. 440/2025

Vs.

1. Dr. P. Nandalal Weerasinghe,

Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, No. 30, Janadhipathu Mawatha, Colombo 01.

2. Mr. W.S. Prasanna,

Director of Foreign Exchange, Department of Foreign Exchange, The Central Bank of Sri Lanka, No. 30, Janadhipathu Mawatha, Colombo 01. 3. Central Bank of Sri Lanka,

2

No. 30, Janadhipathu Mawatha, Colombo 01. 4. Nexia Corporate Consultants (Pvt) Ltd,

No. 130, Level 2, Narahenpita-Nawala Road, Colombo 05.

5. Standard Chartered Bank,

No. 37, York Street, Colombo 01.

6. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department, No. 159, Hulfsdorp, Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

Before: Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Counsel:

Dr. Asanga Gunawansa, P.C. with Dilshan Jayasuriya, Dushinka Nelson, Keshika

Kamalanesan instructed by Nithi Murugesu Associates for the Petitioner.

Chaya Sri Nammuni, D.S.G. with Prabhashanee Jayasekara, S.C. for the 1st to 3rd and 6th

Respondents.

Avindra Rodrigo, P.C. with Shamalie Jayatunga, Tharushi Jayarathne instructed by M.J.S.

Fonseka for the 4th Respondent.

Sheshan Gunawardena with Usman Anewer instructed by Paul Rathnayake Associates for

the 5th Respondent.

Argued on: 06.11.2025

3

Delivered on: 02.12.2025

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Judgement

Introduction

The Petitioner is a dual citizen of Sri Lanka and United States of America (U.S.A). The Petitioner,

having accumulated a large sum of money while being in U.S.A., had sent USD 3,000,000/- (Three

Million U.S. Dollars) to the 4th Respondent to purchase a certain amount of shares in the Union

Bank in Petitioner’s name. The said money had been sent to an account operated by the 4th

Respondent in the 5th Respondent bank, who is a body incorporated under the laws of Sri Lanka,

which is also capable of suing and being sued in its corporate name; its main business is carrying

on the business of a commercial bank as well.

The 4th Respondent is also a body incorporated under the laws of Sri Lanka which is capable of

suing and being sued in its corporate name, and it is inter alia carrying on a business of company

secretaries and business of brokers of the share market as well. It has a license to carry out such

business. The 4th Respondent is also registered in the Security Exchange Commission as a broker

as well.

For the purpose of purchasing the said shares, the said amount of money had to be converted into

Sri Lankan Rupees. In the meantime, at the request of the Petitioner, the 4th Respondent through

the 5th Respondent has sought permission of the 1st Respondent to purchase the shares in the Union

Bank. However, an investigation had been initiated by the Central Bank since the said amount of

money was sent without prior permission under the Exchange Control Act, No. 24 of 1953 (as

amended). After the investigation, the Central Bank by the letter marked as X3 dated 16.11.2007

4

directed to freeze the said money in the said account, and 5th Respondent is required not to transfer

the same.

After investigation, the Government had filed an indictment in the High Court of Colombo against

certain other parties who are not before this Court. Nevertheless, the High Court case had ended

up in the discharge of the accused from indictment.

However, during the investigations, since the 2nd Respondent had issued a freezing order on the

5th Respondents in respect of the said money lying in an account in the 5th Respondent bank, the

money has not being utilised. Therefore, the Petitioner was unable to purchase the said shares with

the money, which is still lying in the 5th Respondent bank. Accordingly, now the Petitioner seeks

to withdraw that money by seeking to cancel the order contained in X3 or 1R1 by way of a Writ

of Certiorari, and compel the Respondents to release the money by way of a Writ of Mandamus.

However, after issuing notice, this case came up for arguments before me on 06.11.2025, and the

following arguments were advanced by the counsel.

Though the 4th and 5th Respondents have not filed formal objections, the 1st to 3rd Respondents

have filed their respective formal objections, and it is their position that since there was an

investigation in respect of the said money and the order contained in 1R1 issued by the 2nd

Respondent pending investigation. However, after the investigation there had been an indictment

that ended up in the indictment of the indicted accused before the High Court; therefore, now the

1st to 3rd Respondents cannot take any decision since there is no proper provision.

Arguments

The first contention advanced by Dr. Gunawansa is that paragraph 3(h) of the Objections is

stultified by Section 30(2) of the Foreign Exchange Act, No. 12 of 2017 (hereinafter referred to as

5

“the 2017 Act”), due to the fact that since the investigations had commenced before the

promulgation of the Act under its predecessor the Exchange Control Act; and in terms of Section

30(2) of the 2017 Act, the same investigation will continue as it was continued under the earlier

Act, however, the investigations should be concluded or terminated within six months of the

commencement of the operation of the 2017 Act. Therefore, no investigation can be conducted

thereafter.

As such, since there is no investigation, he argues, that the money should be released to the

Petitioner who is has the title to the said money admittedly sent by him. He also argues that freezing

order was made after the money came to Sri Lanka but before the conversion into Sri Lankan

Rupees, and therefore at the time of filing this Application, he was unaware that 1R1 was in

existence, and on it, came forth with the Objections of the 1st Respondent. Therefore, prayer (b)

relates to that.

In addition to that, he prayed for prayer (d) as well, compelling the Central Bank to release the

money.

Mr. Avindra Rodrigo, learned President’s Counsel, associates with the submissions made by Dr.

Gunawansa, and he further submits that neither any of the Respondents nor the Petitioner benefits

from the frozen money.

The Counsel for the 5th Respondent, Sheshan Gunawardena also associates with the submissions

of Dr. Gunawansa, and informs that he will abide by any order of the Court.

Ms. Jayasekara on the other hand contended that, the investigations were over by 2007, and

indictments were filed in 2009. Even after the conclusion of the High Court trial, since there is no

provision to cancel 1R1, Ms. Jayasekara moves that Court be pleased to make any suitable order.

6

However, in the course of her submission, she tried to distinguish a freezing order and a directive

given by 1R1. Her argument is that what is contained in 1R1 is only a directive.

Factual matrix

Now I wish to advert to the factual matrix of this case in chronological order to avoid repetition of

facts, and also for easier understanding of the same before I consider the main issue.

The Petitioner is an individual who is a dual citizen of Sri Lanka and the USA. He asserts that he

is the founder of a company called “Galleon International Master Fund SPC Limited” (GIMF).

The said company had remitted USD 1,000,000/- (One Million Dollars) in 2006, and followed by

the Petitioner who had remitted USD 2,000,000/- (Two Million Dollars) in 2007 to the account

bearing No. 01112225801, which is operated by the 4th Respondent in the 5th Respondent bank for

the purpose of purchasing shares in the Union Bank in the name of the Petitioner, who would be

the sole beneficiary of the said shares.

The said account is a SIERA account; however, it transpired that before the remittance, no

permission had been obtained by the Petitioner or any other relevant party under the Foreign

Exchange Act, to remit the said amount of money. Nevertheless, the said amount of money is lying

into the credit of the said account operated by the 4th Respondent who is a company secretary and

an agent who, according to the Petitioner, holds the said money for and on behalf of the Petitioner.

After remitting the said money of Three Million US Dollars, the Petitioner had requested the 4th

Respondent to cause the 5th Respondent to obtain permission of the Central Bank, or any other

relevant authority of the Foreign Exchange Control department of the Central Bank, to permit the

7

4th Respondent to purchase shares of the Union Bank with the said remitted money, in the name

of the Petitioner, after converting the same into Sri Lankan Rupees.

Accordingly, it is an undisputed fact that the 5th Respondent, at the request of the 4th Respondent,

had written to the Exchange Controller attached to the Central Bank by the letter marked as X2

annexed to the original Petition, requesting for the said permission.

However, in between there had been certain correspondence between the parties. Nevertheless, by

letter dated 16.11.2007, the 3rd Respondent has decided to investigate into the matter since the said

large amount of money had been remitted by the Petitioner without first obtaining permission of

the Exchange Controller through a SIERA account. The said letter further directs the 5th

Respondent not to allow or permit anybody, including the Petitioner, to transfer or remit the said

money to any other account until the investigations are over.

However, after investigations, it is also an undisputed fact that certain three individuals (not the

Petitioner) had been indicted before the High Court of Colombo, and the said indictment had been

withdrawn without any results. Accordingly, the indicted three individuals have been discharged

without any proceedings. However, it is also common ground that neither the Petitioner nor any

of the Respondents to this proceedings, including the 4th and 5th Respondents, or any other related

officer, has been indicted in the High Court or is wanted for any other criminal offence relating to

the said money.

In the meantime, the Petitioner has persisted in his request to the 4th and 5th Respondents, to the

other Respondents, namely the Central Bank Governor, and various other authorities, to release

his funds for the purpose of allowing him to invest the same in other lucrative business.

8

Nevertheless, the 1st to 3rd Respondents have turned down the Petitioner's request on the basis that

there is no law or provision enabling them to give such permission to the Petitioner, despite the

fact that, they had given instructions to the 5th Respondent, directing it not to release the funds

until the investigations are completed in 2007. The same letter dated 16.11.2007 is marked by the

Petitioner as X3 and by the Respondents as 1R1. Therefore, since the requests of the Petitioner has

been turned down, the Petitioner has no other option but to institute this Application to obtain inter

alia the following reliefs;

“(b) Grant and issue a Writ of Certiorari quashing the decision said to have been made by

the 1st Respondent and/ or the 2nd Respondent and/ or 3rd Respondent not to withdraw and/

or rescind the Directive dated 16th November 2007 thereby preventing the transfer of the

said Funds lawfully belonging to the Petitioner, presently maintained in an account in the

name of the 4th Respondent, in the 5th Respondent bank, to an account maintained by the

Petitioner.

(c) Grant and issue a Writ of Prohibition preventing the 1st Respondent and/or the 2nd

Respondent and/ or the 3rd Respondent from acting on and/ or relying on the decision said

to have been taken by them to not to withdraw and/ or rescind the Directive dated 16th

November 2007, thereby preventing the transfer of the said Funds lawfully belonging to

the Petitioner, presently maintained in an account in the name of the 4th Respondent, in the

5th Respondent bank, to an account maintained by the Petitioner.

(d) Grant and issue a Writ of Mandamus compelling the 1st Respondent and/or the 2nd

Respondent and/ or the 3rd Respondent to exercise the power and/ or authority vested in

them under Section 9 or any other provision of the Foreign Exchange Act, No. 12 of 2017

9

and issue a Directive withdrawing and/ or rescinding the aforesaid Directive dated 16th

November 2007, thereby permitting the 4th Respondent to transfer the funds lying to the

credit of the aforesaid Account bearing No: 02112225802, maintained in the name of the

4th Respondent, in the 5th Respondent bank, to an account maintained by the Petitioner.”

It is also an undisputed fact that the 1st to 3rd Respondents have filed their respective objections

and in their prayer they have informed and requested the Court to make any suitable order since

they cannot release, permit nor make any order to release the said money lying into the credit

account bearing No. 02112225802 of the 5th Respondent bank operated by the 4th Respondent,

who holds it for and on behalf of the Petitioner.

For the purpose of further clarity, I wish to mention the reliefs of the 3rd Respondent which was

sought from this Court;

“I. Dismiss the Petitioner’s Petition in limine; or

II. Dismiss the Petitioner’s Petition;

III. Award costs; and

IV. Grant such other and further relied as Your Lordships’ Court may deem fit.”

Now I will consider the contentions advanced by counsel on either side.

It is the contention of the learned State Counsel, Ms. Jayasekara for and on behalf of the 1st to 3rd

and 6th Respondents, that the directions in the letter dated 16.11.2007 was given under Section 38

of the Exchange Control Act, No. 24 of 1953 (as amended). However, the same Act was repealed

in 2017 and replaced by the provisions of the Foreign Exchange Act. Nevertheless, there is no

transitional provision or any other provision to cater to the occasion; therefore, though the

10

directions were given under Section 38 of the Exchange Control Act, now, only the provisions of

Section 30 of the Foreign Exchange Control Act applies.

However, Section 30 of the Foreign Exchange Act of 2017 is silent in respect of the matter in issue,

particularly the directions given by the said letter 1R1 (X3). Therefore, having reproduced Section

30, it is her argument that the 1st to 3rd Respondents cannot give any direction regarding the said

money, unless the Court gives any direction.

In addition to that, she draws parallel from Section 187 of the Security Exchange Commission Act,

where provisions have been made to cater to such situations. Therefore, since there is a lacuna in

the existing law, it is her argument that nothing can be done about it by the 1st to 3rd Respondents.

On the other hand, the learned President's Counsel, Dr. Gunawansa, argues that although the

direction given by the said letter dated 16.11.2007 was given to freeze the money lying in the

account of the 5th Respondent bank operated by the 4th Respondent, and that there is no provision

in the present Foreign Exchange Act, Section 30 of the said Act gives certain clues to cater to the

situation; where it is provided that the proceedings, investigations, or any other steps taken under

Section 38 will have to be concluded within six months from the promulgation of the 2017 Act.

Therefore, it is contented for and on behalf of the Petitioner that since the six months has already

lapsed from 2017, now the Court can give Writ of Mandamus, quashing the order given in 1R1

(X3) issued by the 2nd Respondent, compelling the Petitioner to be entitled to the said money lying

in the 5th Respondent bank with interest. He further buttresses his contention by stating that since

there is no other legal bar and no money forfeiture has been made, the Court can issue a Writ of

Mandamus to release the said money.

Now I will consider those two arguments and weigh the same.

11

As Ms. Jayasekara argued, there is no provision in the present Foreign Exchange Act to cater to

the situation. However, as ably argued by Dr. Gunawansa, whatever investigations or proceedings

commenced under Section 38 of the Exchange Control Act has to be concluded within six months.

Accordingly, the six months had lapsed and the investigations had taken place in 2007, due to the

remittance of the money not through a SIERA account, with the permission of the Central Bank

Exchange Controller Department.

However, after investigations it has been disclosed that the money has not been sent by no other

person other than the Petitioner, who has sent the said money with the intention of purchasing

shares in the Union Bank. Since permission was not given by the Exchange Control Authority of

the Central Bank to purchase the said shares after converting the Dollars into Sri Lankan Rupees,

and the freezing order by letter marked as 1R1 (X3), the said money is still lying. Therefore, it is

my view that as provided by Section 30 of the Foreign Exchange Act of 2017, all investigations

should be concluded by the lapse of six months.

Unreasonableness of the Freezing Order

The Petitioner urges that this Court should also follow the same test of reasonableness enunciated

and proposed by His Lordship Justice Obeyesekere in the case of Colonel U.R. Abeyratne v. Lt.

General N.U.M.M.W. Senanayake and Others1.

His Lordship Justice Obeyesekere was not inclined to follow the test of reasonableness set out in

the Wednesbury case2 as its standard is very high. Additionally, His Lordship declined to follow

1 (2020) CA (Writ) Application No: 239/2017 [CA Minutes 07.02.2020] 2 Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. v. Wednesbury Corporation [1948] 1 KB 223.

12

the GCHQ case3; however, His Lordship was inclined to following the rules in the case of

Tameside4;

“The above reasoning can thus be summarized as follows:

(a) The threshold for judicial intervention set by Wednesbury is extremely high. The

threshold in GCHQ, being intrinsically linked to Wednesbury has a similarly high

threshold;

(b) The test laid down in Tameside appears to be more realistic, and balanced, as

it acknowledges conduct which no sensible authority acting with due appreciation

of its responsibilities would have decided to adopt, as being unreasonable;

(c) It is the duty of Courts to consider whether a decision is reasonable in the light

of the facts and circumstances of each case.

This Court is of the view that Courts must take a more realistic approach in fulfilling its

function of probing the quality of decisions and ensuring that assertions made by public

authorities are properly substantiated and justified.”5

As far as reasonableness is concerned on the part of the 1st to 3rd Respondents, it is my view that

the Issuing Authority of the said freezing order by document marked as 1R1 (X3) dated 16.11.2007

in terms of Section 38 of the Exchange Control Act; however, the said Act was replaced by the

Foreign Exchange Act, No. 12 of 2017. Corresponding provisions are contained in Section 30 of

the same; however, it does not provide for the Respondents to release or lift the said freezing order.

3 Council of Civil Service Unions v. Minister for the Civil Service [1985] AC 374. 4 Secretary of State for Education and Science v. Metropolitan Borough Council of Tameside [1977] AC 1014. 5 Colonel U.R. Abeyratne v. Lt. General N.U.M.M.W. Senanayake and Others [2020]

13

Nevertheless, if the freezing order is not lifted, the money will remain lying into the credit of the

account operated by the 4th Respondent in the 5th Respondent bank without being utilised, and no

one can do anything about it. It is an admittedly undisputed fact that the money is held by the 4th

Respondent for and on behalf of the Petitioner who is the person who had sent the money; therefore,

he is entitled to the same.

Thus, if the 1st to 3rd Respondents do not act reasonably in that behalf, the Court, on the Application

of the Petitioner, can issue an order in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari, quashing the order

contained in 1R1(X3), and a Writ of Mandamus, compelling the 1st to 3rd Respondents to lift the

said freezing order and release the money.

Interpretation of Statutory provisions

Section 30 of the Foreign Exchange Act, No. 12 of 2017 reads as thus;

“30. (1) The Exchange Control Act (Chapter 423) is hereby repealed.

(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the aforesaid Act-

(a) all suits, actions and proceedings instituted under the repealed Act and pending

on the day immediately prior to the appointed date, shall, with effect from the

appointed date, be deemed to be suits, actions and proceedings instituted under the

repealed Act and be heard and concluded under that Act; and

(b) all investigations and inquiries instituted under the repealed Act and pending

on the day immediately prior to the appointed date, shall, with effect from the

appointed date, be deemed to be investigations and inquiries instituted under the

14

repealed Act and shall be concluded under that Act within a period of six months

from the appointed date.”6 (Empasis is mine)

In interpreting the above-mentioned section, interpretation must be given on the plain

reading of the said provision. Therefore, I follow the literal rule of interpretation as further

explained by N.S. Bindra in his book “Interpretation of Statutes” (2017), which reads as

thus;

“Literal Rule of Interpretation

The first and primary rule of construction is that the intention of the legislature must be

found in the words used by the legislature itself. If the words used are capable of one

construction only, then it would not be open to the courts to adopt any other hypothetical

construction on the ground that such hypothetical construction is more consistent with the

alleged object and policy of the Act. The legislature must be deemed to have intended what

it has said. It is no part of the duty of the court to presume that the legislature meant

something other than what it said. If the words of the section are plain and unambiguous,

then there is no question of interpretation or construction. The duty of the court then is to

implement those provisions with no hesitation. The words used in the material provisions

of the statute must be interpreted in their plain grammatical meaning, and it is only when

such words are capable of two constructions, that the question of giving effect to the policy

or object of the Act can legitimately arise.”7

6 Section 30 of the Foreign Exchange Act, No. 12 of 2017 7 N S Bindra, Interpretation of Statutes (12th Edn., LexisNexis 2017) 317.

15

Accordingly, although the Issuing Authority of the said freezing order is not empowered to do

anything, the Court can still give directions, first to quash the said freezing order that should have

ended six months after the promulgation of the Foreign Exchange Act, No. 12 of 2017, and now

since the money remains unutilised and no one has claimed it other than the Petitioner, it is my

view that a Writ of Mandamus should be issued to release the said money to the Petitioner with the

interest thereof.

Conclusion

For the reasons adumbrated above, I grant the reliefs as prayed for in prayers (b), (c), (d) of the

Petition.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL