Page 1 of 11

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application under

section 364 and 365 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of

1979.

CA (PHC) APN 0027/23 Officer-in-Charge,

Police station,

Madampe.

HC Chilaw COMPLAINANT

BA 73/22 Vs.

MC Chilaw

B 131/22 Rankoth Pedige Hasan Buddhika,

Mahagama South,

Mugunuwatawana.

SUSPECT

AND

Lindamulage Anoma Priyanga Silva,

Mahagama South,

Mugunuwatawana.

PETITIONER

Page 2 of 11

Vs.

1. Officer-in-Charge,

Police station,

Madampe.

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

2. The Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENT

3. Rankoth Pedige Hasan

Buddhika,

Mahagama South,

Mugunuwatawana.

SUSPECT-RESPONDENT

AND BETWEEN

Lindamulage Anoma Priyanga Silva,

Mahagama South,

Mugunuwatawana.

PETITIONER-PETITIONER

Page 3 of 11

Vs.

1. Officer-in-Charge,

Police station,

Madampe.

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENT

2. The Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT

3. Rankoth Pedige Hasan

Buddhika,

Mahagama South,

Mugunuwatawana.

SUSPECT-RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENT

Before : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

: P. Kumararatnam, J.

Page 4 of 11

Counsel : Janajith De Silva with Eranga Rathnayake for the

Petitioner

: Jehan Gunasekara, S.C. for the respondents

Inquiry on : 26-07-2023

Order on : 01-09-2023

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

This is an application by the petitioner-petitioner (hereinafter referred to as the

petitioner) invoking the revisionary jurisdiction of this Court seeking to revise

and set aside the order dated 17-02-2023 of the learned High Court Judge of

Chilaw.

From the impugned order, the learned High Court Judge refused to grant bail

for Rankoth Pedige Hasan Buddhika, who is the suspect in the Magistrate

Court of Chilaw Case No. B 131/22.

The suspect has been arrested by the officers of the Madampe police on 01-02-

2022, for an alleged offence of possession and trafficking of 15.85 grams of a

substance suspected to be Diacetylmorphine, also known as Heroin.

According to the B-report filed before the Magistrate of Chilaw by the Officer-in-

Charge of the relevant police in that regard, this is an offence punishable in

terms section 54A(a) and 54A(d) of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs

Ordinance as amended.

The suspect has been in remand since, and according to the Government

Analyst Report dated 02-08-2022, the substances produced before the

Government Analyst had been identified as having 2.44 grams of

Diacetylmorphine, namely, Heroin.

Page 5 of 11

The suspect had made an application for bail before the High Court of Chilaw,

and the learned High Court Judge of Chilaw by her order dated 17-02-2023

has refused bail on the basis that the suspect has several pending cases and

previous convictions.

It is apparent that although when the bail application was preferred before the

High Court on the 17th October 2022 the provisions of the Poisons, Opium and

Dangerous Drugs (Amendment) Act No. 41 of 2022 was not in operation, but,

when this matter was considered before the Court and the relevant order was

pronounced, the Amendment Act was in operation and it has been brought to

the attention of the learned High Court Judge.

The learned High Court Judge has pronounced this order based on the

provisions of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance, as stood

then, where a person who is seeking bail for a charge of having committed an

offence in terms of section 54 of the Act as amended by Act No. 13 of 1984

shall establish exceptional circumstances for him or her to be granted bail if

the alleged quantity of the Heroin is over 2 grams.

It appears from the proceedings before the High Court of Chilaw that the

learned Counsel who represented the suspect has made the bail application on

behalf of him, relying on the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs

(Amendment) Act No. 41 of 2022. The basis of the application had been that

the suspect in this matter is entitled to be released on bail as the pure quantity

of the drug identified as Heroin, alleged to have been in possession and

trafficked amounts to less than 10 grams, namely 2.44 grams, and the

maximum period a person can be kept on remand for having possessed such a

quantity shall be 12 months in terms of section 84, which can only be extended

up to a total period of 24 months in terms of section 85 and nothing more.

Page 6 of 11

The learned State Counsel who represented the Hon. Attorney General at the

High Court had objected to the application for bail on the basis that no

exceptional circumstances are available for the Court to grant bail.

For matters of clarity, I would now reproduce the relevant portion of the order

dated17-02-2023 pronounced by the learned High Court Judge of Chilaw in

consequent to the application for bail.

.

02 44

.

At the hearing of this application, it was the contention of the learned Counsel

for the petitioner that in terms of section 83 (2) of the Poisons, Opium and

Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended by Amendment Act No. 41 of 2022,

which needs to be read with section 84 and 85 of the Ordinance as amended,

the learned High Court Judge should have released the suspect as the purpose

of the relevant Amendment was to release suspects who alleged to have in his

or her possession a pure quantity of less than 10 grams of the dangerous drug

on bail.

The learned State Counsel who represented the Hon. Attorney General agreed

that he has no basis to object to the granting of bail for the suspect as the

provisions of the law now stand after the Amendment Act No. 41 of 2022 is

clear. However, he urged the Court to consider imposing strict bail conditions

considering the previous history of the suspect.

Page 7 of 11

For the purposes of this order, I would now reproduce the relevant section 04

of the Amendment Act No. 41 of 2022, which has repealed the section 83 of the

Poisons, Opium, and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance amended by Act No. 13 of

1984, and has replaced it with a new section 83.

The replaced section 83 of the principal enactment reads as follows;

83. (1) Subject to the provisions of sections 84, 85 and subsection

(2) of this section, a person suspected or accused of an offence

under sections 54A and 54B of this Ordinance, shall not be released

on bail by the High Court except in exceptional circumstances.

(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 84 and 85, a person

suspected or accused of an offence under subsection (1) of section

54A and section 54B-

(a) of which the pure quantity of the dangerous drug,

trafficked, imported, exported or possessed is ten grams or

above in terms of the report issued by the Government Analyst

under section 77A; and

(b) which is punishable with death or life imprisonment,

shall not be released on bail except by the Court of Appeal in

exceptional circumstances.

(3) For the purposes of this section dangerous drug means

Morphine, Cocaine, Heroin and Methamphetamine.

The following new sections 84 and 85 were also inserted immediately after

section 83 of the principal enactment by the same amendment, which reads

thus;

Page 8 of 11

84. A suspect or an accused who has not been tried and has not

been convicted and sentenced by a Court under the provisions of

subsection (1) of section 54A and section 54B, shall not be detained

in custody for a period exceeding twelve months from the date of

his arrest.

85. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 84, on application

made in that behalf by the Attorney-General to the High Court

established under Article 105 or a High Court established by Article

154P of the Constitution such Court may, for good and sufficient

reasons that shall be recorded, order that a suspect or an accused

who has not been tried and has not been convicted and sentenced

by a Court under the provisions of subsection (1) of section 54A and

section 54B, be detained in custody for a period in excess of twelve

months: Provided that, the period of detention ordered under this

section, shall not in any case exceed three months at a time and

twenty four months in the aggregate.

The plain reading of section 83 (1) as it stands now clearly establishes that a

person suspected or accused of an offence under section 54 A and section 54 B

of the Ordinance shall not be released on bail by the High Court except in

exceptional circumstances.

However, the above provision is subject to the provisions of section 84, 85 and

subsection (2) of section 83.

Therefore, it needs to be noted that granting of bail by a High Court under

exceptional circumstances for a suspect or an accused in terms of this section

shall have to be read in conjunction with the above sections.

Page 9 of 11

Section 83 (2) provides that notwithstanding the provisions of section 84 and

85, a person suspected of or accused of under subsection (1) for having

committed an offence in terms of section 54A and section 54B of the Ordinance

shall not be released by the High Court if the pure quantity of the dangerous

drug is 10 grams or above in terms of the Government Analyst Report, and it is

only the Court of Appeal that has the jurisdiction to consider bail under

exceptional circumstances.

Section 84 and 85 are sections that are applicable to granting of bail by the

High Court when the pure quantity of the dangerous drug is less than 10

grams and if the suspect or the accused had been in incarceration for more

than 12 months.

Section 84 stipulates that no person to be detained for more than 12 months in

remand custody who has not been tried and not been convicted and sentenced

by a Court in terms of section 54 A and section 54 B of the Ordinance for a

period exceeding 12 months from the date of his arrest.

Section 85 clearly provides that such a person can be kept in remand custody

for more than 12 months only if the Attorney General has obtained prior

permission from the relevant High Court by showing good and sufficient

reasons to detain a suspect or an accused for a period in excess of 12 months.

Even this extension shall not in any case exceed 3 months at a time, and 24

months in aggregate.

Having considered the above provisions of the law, it is the considered view of

this Court that if the pure quantity of the dangerous drug alleged to have been

possessed or trafficked by a person is less than 10 grams, the relevant High

Court has no option but to release such a person on bail after 12 months in

remand custody, unless the Attorney General has acted and had obtained an

order in terms of section 85 of the Ordinance as amended by the Amendment

Act No. 41 of 2022.

Page 10 of 11

It is the view of this Court that in any case, even if such an order has been

obtained, no person shall be detained in remand custody for more than 24

months if the pure quantity of the dangerous drug is less than 10 grams unless

the accused has been tried, convicted, and sentenced by a competent Court.

As the alleged pure quantity of the dangerous drug possessed and trafficked by

the suspect in the case under consideration was 2.44 grams of Heroin, he had

been in remand custody from the date of his arrest on 01-02-2022 and she has

not been tried, convicted, and sentenced. The Attorney General has not taken

any steps in terms of section 85 seeking an extension of the remand period.

Therefore, it is the view of this Court that the learned High Court Judge was

misdirected as to the relevant law when bail was refused for the suspect. The

matters considered by the learned High Court Judge in order to refuse bail for

the suspect are matters that should have been considered in imposing suitable

bail conditions to the suspect.

It is the view of this Court that the suspect is entitled to be released on bail in

terms of the law as it stands now, for the reasons as considered above.

Accordingly, the order dated 17-02-2023 of the learned High Court Judge of

Chilaw is set aside as it cannot be allowed to stand, and the suspect is released

on bail on the following bail conditions.

1. Cash bail of Rs. 25000/-

2. Surety bail of Rs. 250000/- each with 2 sureties. The petitioner shall

be one of the sureties. The other surety shall be a family member or a

close relative of the suspect, and the said surety shall tender an

affidavit to the Court indicating his or her relationship to the suspect

and is willing to stand surety for him.

Page 11 of 11

3. The suspect is prevented from travelling overseas until the conclusion

of this case, and he is ordered to hand over his passport, if he is in

possession of one. If he had not obtained a passport, he shall file an

affidavit before the Magistrate Court in that regard.

4. The Registrar of the Magistrate Court of Chilaw is directed to inform

The Controller of Immigration and Emigration that a travel ban has

been imposed on the suspect by providing The Controller with

necessary details in that regard.

The Registrar of the Court is directed to communicate this order to the

Magistrate Court of Chilaw for necessary compliance and to the High Court of

Chilaw for information.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal