1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal from the High Court in

terms of section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Complainant

CA/HCC/187/2017 VS High Court of Chilaw Case No: HC 06/2008

Subramaniam Mohan alias Iseya Amudan

Accused

And now between

Subramaniam Mohan alias Iseya Amudan

Accused Appellants

VS

The Honourable Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12

Complainant -Respondent

2

BEFORE : N. Bandula Karunarathna, J.

: R. Gurusinghe, J.

COUNSEL : Asthika Devendra, AAL with

Selvaraja Dushyanthan, AAL

for the Accused-Appellant

Riyaz Bary, DSG

for the Respondent

ARGUED ON : 04/10/2022

DECIDED ON : 02/11/2022

R. Gurusinghe, J.

The accused-appellant was indicted in the High Court of Chilaw on three

charges.

1. Having committed the murder of one Arumugam Kuwendran on the 16th

of July 2005, an offence punishable under section 296 of the Penal Code.

2. Having attempted to murder M.M. Jayasiri on the same day, an offence

punishable under section 300 of the Penal Code.

3. Being in possession of a gun, an offence punishable under section 22 (3)

of the Firearms Ordinance as amended by Act No 22 of 1996.

3

The appellant was convicted as charged and sentenced to death for the first

charge. For the 2nd charge, the appellant was sentenced to 10 years

imprisonment and fined Rs. 7,500/=. For the 3rd charge, the appellant was

fined Rs. 20,000/- with a default term.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and the sentence, the appellant

appealed to the Court of Appeal.

The prosecution called PW1, PW5, PW8, PW9, PW10, PW14, PW15, PW17,

PW11, PW12 and PW13.

The appellant made a lengthy dock statement.

Facts of the case

The incident happened in a restaurant named New Lanka Hotel, situated in the

Chilaw town, on the 16th of July 2005. The deceased was employed at the

restaurant as a waiter. The deceased was shot dead, and PW10 sustained gun

shot injuries. The person who shot the deceased fled the area. Police

recovered seven cartridge cases on the floor of the restaurant. As per the

evidence of PW14 (police officer), he was on duty on that day and happened to

go to the place where the incident occurred. PW14 asked the people who were

gathered there as to what happened. He came to know that a person was shot

and the criminal had got into a green-coloured three-wheeler and left towards

the direction of Puttalam. Then PW14 got into another three-wheeler along with

two other officers and went in search of the three-wheeler in which the criminal

travelled. A three-wheeler was parked at Sithara Pharmacy. The driver of that

three-wheeler told PW14 that a person had asked him to drop him in a

Anamaduwa bus. That person got into a Anamaduwa bus near Jude church.

PW14 gathered three other police officers who were on duty at a check point.

PW17 stopped a van and proceeded towards the Anamaduwa bus. They

4

stopped the bus near a place called Weherakale. All the passengers who were

standing were asked to get down from the bus, and they were searched. The

seated passengers were also checked. PW14 suspected the appellant and

searched his trouser pockets. There was a pistol in his right trouser pocket

with a magazine and one live cartridge. In his left trouser pocket, there was

another magazine which had eight cartridges, the full compliment. The

appellant was then arrested.

The police found a bag left at a lottery sellers place by an unidentified person.

Inside that bag, there were 16 live cartridges, which can be used in the pistol,

which was alleged to be in possession of the appellant. According to the Govt.

Analyst, the pistol which was alleged to have been found in the pocket of the

appellant is proven to be the weapon which was used to kill the deceased.

The prosecution case depends on circumstantial evidence.

The grounds of appeal are as follows:

1. The prosecution has failed to prove the guilt of the appellant for all

charges by independent witnesses who testified in the trial.

2. The learned Trial Judge has failed to properly analyze and evaluate the

evidence of PW14.

3. The learned Trial Judge was erroneous and contradictory to the law and

facts and he failed to apply the principles of law.

The only evidence against the appellant is the evidence of PW 14 that he had

recovered a pistol from the possession of the appellant and that it was the

pistol used to kill the deceased.

PW1 was an eyewitness to the incident. As per his evidence, he had asked

from the perpetrator what food he preferred to have, and he served him what

5

he ordered. PW1 had not identified the appellant at the identification parade

held on the 26th of July 2005, 10 days after the incident. PW5, the driver of the

three-wheeler, identified the wrong person in the identification parade, and he

had not identified the appellant in the parade. The cashier also did not identify

the appellant at the identification parade.

The people who had the opportunity to see the criminal at the crime scene had

not identified the appellant as the man who shot the deceased.

As per PW14, he and five other officers chased the bus and arrested the

appellant with a gun. Out of those five officers, the prosecution called only

PW17. The evidence of PW17 was that he was at the front door of the bus.

PW14 had taken out a person from the bus in about 5 minutes. The arrested

person was the appellant. PW17 had not seen that PW14 had searched the

appellant or taken out a gun from the appellants trouser pocket. The evidence

of PW17 does not support that PW14 had recovered a firearm and two

magazines from the appellant. The prosecution did not call the other police

officers who participated in the arrest.

PW8 was the driver of the bus. As per his evidence, he was driving a bus from

Chilaw to Anamaduwa that day. He recollects that the police officers stopped

the bus and there were three officers who were in uniform and the other three

were in civilian clothes. All the passengers standing in the bus were asked to

get down from the bus. The seated passengers were asked to remain seated.

One passenger was arrested. This witness had not seen the recovery of a

weapon from the arrested person. PW9 was the conductor of the bus; he

stated that about six police officers stopped the bus, and the passengers who

were standing in the bus were asked to get down, and the seated passengers

were asked to remain seated. This witness did not state that PW14 had

recovered a weapon from any passenger. The other police officers who

participated along with PW14 were not called to support the evidence of PW14.

The only person called was PW17, who had not seen the recovery of any

6

weapon at that time. The driver and conductor had not seen the recovery of

any weapon.

If the appellant was a standing passenger, the weapon should have been

recovered by the police officers who were at the doors of the bus. As per the

evidence of the appellant, the appellant was a seated passenger. If the

appellant was a seated passenger, the weapon in the trouser pocket could not

be taken out while he was seated. Suppose the weapon was recovered after he

was asked to stand while all the others were seated, then in that case, it is very

prominent that it could be noticed by the bus driver or definitely by the

conductor, who would have also been curious to know as to what was going on,

or by the other police officers who were with PW14.

The witnesses at the crime scene who had the opportunity to see the person

who shot the deceased, had not identified the appellant as the culprit. The

driver of the three-wheeler had not identified the appellant as the person who

got into the three-wheeler that day at the identification parade. Furthermore,

he had identified the wrong person who participated in the parade as the

person who got into his three-wheeler. No other police officer had seen the

recovery of the weapon or at least after the recovery of it at that time.

PW15 was the acting Headquarters Inspector of the Chilaw police station at

that time and he gave evidence. PW15 had recovered a bag with 16 live

cartridges left at a lottery sellers shop. The lottery seller was not called as a

witness. It was unclear whether the bag was left before the shooting incident

or afterwards. That bag of cartridges was not connected to the appellant by

any evidence.

Furthermore, PW15 had not stated that PW14 had recovered the pistol which

was used to kill the deceased. In these circumstances, the recovery of a gun by

PW14 from the appellant was not supported by any of the lay witnesses or by

police evidence. Besides, the evidence of PW14 is not consistent. PW14 said PC

7

Sarath stopped the bus, but PW17 said he stopped the bus. PW14 said that

PW17 Rajakuruna had stopped the van and all six police officers had got into

that van. On page 225, PW17 answered as follows:

:

?

: .

.

: ?

:

In view of these contradictory positions, the evidence of PW14 cannot be

considered as consistent at all times to completely rely on this evidence to

convict the appellant.

The learned High Court Judge has stated that the defence had failed to make

suggestions regarding their version to the prosecution witnesses in the cross-

examination. The only witness who implicated the appellant in the crime was

PW14. The stance taken up by the defence was duly suggested to PW14 as

follows:

At page 202

:

?

: .

35 40

.

8

:

?

: .

The finding that the defence had not suggested the position taken up in the

dock statement is erroneous.

The case for prosecution completely depends on circumstantial evidence.

There was no apparent motive on the part of the appellant to kill the deceased.

There was no evidence to say that at least the appellant knew the deceased.

The absence of motive is a factor in favour of the accused in the case of

circumstantial evidence. It is a settled principle that the circumstances from

which an inference of guilt is sought to be drawn must be cogently and firmly

established.

None of the eyewitnesses to the incident had identified the appellant as the

person who shot the deceased.

The conviction of the appellant is completely based on the fact that PW14 had

recovered the weapon from the appellant. This evidence is not corroborated by

any lay witness or any police witness, especially those who participated in the

arrest of the appellant.

The learned Deputy Solicitor General pointed out, drawing attention to the case

of SC/Appeal 154/2010, the Attorney General vs Devunderage Nihal, decided

on 03/1/2019, that such evidence need not be corroborated. In that case, the

Supreme Court quoted the following passage from Sir John Woodruff and

Syed Amir Ali (Law of Evidence 1st edition, Vol. I page 601 603)

9

It is open to the court to accept the evidence of a police officer and to

convict the accused on the basis thereof, if the evidence of the police

officer is trustworthy and reliable. If the court feels that the

uncorroborated testimony of the police officer by itself is capable of

inspiring confidence there is nothing forbidding the court from acting upon

the same. The law does not require that such evidence should be

corroborated. In prosecution under the prevention of Corruption Act 1947,

the testimony of police officials cannot be rejected merely because they are

interested in the success of the prosecution. In another case, the

investigation officer was not investigated. This cannot be said to have

prejudiced the defence []

A court cannot reject the evidence of witnesses, merely because they are

government servants, who, in the course of their duties or even otherwise

might have come into contact with investigating officers and who might

have been requested to assist the investigating agencies. Even in cases

where officers who, in the course of their duties, generally assist the

investigating agencies, there is no need to view the evidence with

suspicion as an invariable rule. []

The evidence of witnesses cannot be judged on the basis of their being

officials, and non-officials simply because they are officers, they cannot be

said to be interested or uninterested. The merit of the evidence is to be

considered and not the persons who come to depose. []

The credibility of public officers should not be doubted on mere suspicion

and without acceptable evidence. Presumption that person acts honestly

applies as much in favour of Police as of other persons. It is not proper

judicial approach to distrust and suspect them without proper ground.

There is no principle of law that without corroboration by independent

witnesses, their testimony cannot be relied upon. []

10

Sir John Woodroffe and Syed Amir Ali (Law of Evidence 20th edition, Vol. 4

page 5171) says that,

It is true that there is no rule of law that uncorroborated testimony of one

witness cannot be accepted. If there is any such rule, it is the rule of

prudence, and whether the rule should be adopted or not, will depend on

the circumstances of each case. Whether the general rule should be

adopted or not depend on the circumstances of each case. As a general

rule a court can and may act on the testimony of a single witness though

uncorroborated. Unless corroboration is insisted upon by a statute, the

court should not insist on corroboration except in the cases where nature of

testimony of single witness itself requires corroboration. One credible

witness outweighs any number of other witnesses. In an appropriate case,

conviction can be founded on solitary testimony of a witness but court

must be satisfied that the evidence of the witness, which it is asked to

accept, is wholly true. In a murder case, conviction can be based on the

testimony of sole eyewitness. The test is whether the evidence has a ring

of truth, is cogent, credible and trustworthy or otherwise.

In this case, there were witnesses who should have identified the appellant if it

was the appellant who shot the deceased. Further, there were five police

officers, the driver and the conductor at the time of the alleged recovery of the

weapon by PW14. None of the five police officers had seen the recovery of the

gun by PW14 and none of them was informed by PW14 that he recovered a

weapon from the appellant. Neither the conductor nor the driver had seen such

recovery of a gun by PW14.

In these circumstances, it is not safe to convict the appellant of a capital

offence, by completely relying on the evidence of PW14.

11

For the reasons set out above, the case against the appellant is not proved

beyond reasonable doubt. Therefore, the conviction and the sentence imposed

on the appellant is set aside.

The Appellant is acquitted.

Appeal allowed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

N. Bandula Karunarathna, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal