==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/PHC/0190/2018

Page 1 of 22

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

The Petition of Appeal against the order dated 24.08.2018 in case Nos. HCRA 15/2015 and HCRA 16/2015 made by the Western Provincial High Court Holden in Colombo.

Badureliya Arachchige Palitha Ariyarne, General Manager of Railways, Office of the General Manager of Railways, P. O. Box No. 355, Colombo 10.

APPLICANT Vs.

1. Thiruwam Cooray Muhandiramge Nihal,

2. Thiruwam Cooray Muhandiramge Udeni,

both of No, 220/1, Baseline Road, Colombo 09.

RESPONDENTS AND

1. Thiruwam Cooray Muhandiramge Nihal,

2. Thiruwam Cooray Muhandiramge Udeni,

both of No, 220/1, Baseline Road, Colombo 09.

RESPONDENTS-PETITIONERS

Court of Appeal Case No:CA/PHC/0190/2018 High Court Colombo Case Nos: 15/2015/Re

16/2015/Re MC Colombo Case Nos: D/8715/5/2014

D/8717/5/2014

CA/PHC/0190/2018

Page 2 of 22

Vs.

Badureliya Arachchige Palitha Ariyarne, General Manager of Railways, Office of the General Manager of Railways, P. O. Box No. 355, Colombo 10.

APPLICANT-RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Thiruwam Cooray Muhandiramge Nihal,

2. Thiruwam Cooray Muhandiramge Udeni,

both of No, 220/1, Baseline Road, Colombo 09.

RESPONDENTS-PETITIONERS-APPELLANTS

Badureliya Arachchige Palitha Ariyarne, General Manager of Railways, Office of the General Manager of Railways, P. O. Box No. 355, Colombo 10.

APPLICANT-RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT

Viyaja Amaratunga, Present General Manager of Railways, Office of the General Manager of Railways, P.O. Box No. 355, Colombo 10.

01 (A) ADDED RESPONDENT

CA/PHC/0190/2018

Page 3 of 22

Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J. K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J. Counsel : Pradeep Perera with P.D.P. Pathirage for the 1st and 2nd Respondents-Petitioners-Appellants. Sehan Zoysa, SSC for the 1(A) Added Respondent. Argued on : 27.08.2025 Written Submissions of the Respondents-Petitioners -Appellants tendered on : 28.11.2024 Written Submissions of the Added Respondent tendered on : 11.10.2024 Decided on : 02.12.2025

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

This is a joint appeal preferred to this Court by the 1st and 2nd Respondents-

Petitioners-Appellants respectively, being father and daughter (hereinafter

called and referred to as the 1st and 2nd Appellants) challenging two different

orders bearing the same date as 24.08.2018 made by the learned High Court

Judge of the Western Province holden at Colombo (hereinafter called and

referred to as the High Court of the Province) in two different applications in

revision bearing Nos. HCRA 15/2015 and HCRA 16/2015 preferred thereto,

respectively, by the 1st and 2nd Appellants seeking to revise and set aside two

different orders bearing the same date as 27.01.2015 made by the learned

Additional Magistrate of Colombo in two different applications bearing Nos. No.

CA/PHC/0190/2018

Page 4 of 22

D/8715/5/14 and D/8717/5/14 against the 1st and 2nd Appellants in

pursuant to an application made thereto by the original Applicant-Respondent-

Respondent (hereinafter called and referred to as the Respondent) by virtue of

the powers vested in him under and in terms of section 5(1) of the State Land

(Recovery of Possession) Act as amended (hereinafter called and referred to as

the Act) praying for an order for eviction of the 1st and 2nd Appellants and their

dependents if any, from a state land referred to in the application.

The facts material and relevant to the instant appeal may be briefly, set out as

follows;

The Respondent had made the said two applications to the Magistrate Court of

Colombo in the said two cases under and in terms of the provisions of Section

5(1) of the Act praying for an order for the eviction of the 1st and 2nd Appellants

and their dependents if any, from a State Land as morefully described in the

schedule to the respective applications (hereinafter called and referred to as the

‘State Land’); and that, the 1st and 2nd Appellants in the said two cases who

appeared before the Magistrate Court of Colombo in pursuant to the summons

issued on each of them by the Court, had raised a preliminary objection as to

the maintainability of the application on the premise that the land from which

eviction had been sought by the Respondent, is not a state land within the

meaning of the Act, but, a land possessed by the grandfather and the father of

the 1st Appellant and thereafter, by the 1st Appellant and his daughter-the 2nd

Appellant in the manner as recited in the statement of showing cause for; a)

the application for ejectment and the affidavit of the Respondent are not in

strict compliance with section 5 (1) (a) (ii), form B and form C of Act No. 7 of

1979; that b) although, section 5 (1) (a) (i) and form B of the Act expressly

enacts that the Respondent shall aver that the land in question is state land, in

this case there is no such averment; that c) although, Form C of the Act enacts

that the Respondent shall in his Affidavit to Court shall affirm that the land is

state land, in the case there is no such Affidavit before Court; that d) since the

CA/PHC/0190/2018

Page 5 of 22

application to eject is not in compliance with the strict statutory requirements,

the land in question is not state land in terms of Act No. 7 of 1979, and as

such the relief prayed for cannot be granted in law; that e) since the land in

question is not state land, the appellants have not violated section 4 (a) of Act

No. 7 of 1979; that f) appellant’s grandfather and father were in possession and

occupation of the land in question since about 1984 and the Appellants and

their father (Respondent in Case No. D 8717/2014) are continuing possession

and occupation of the same; that g) The appellants are continuing the business

of a motor vehicle repairing garage carried on by their grandfather and father in

the said land and all his official documents including the National Identity

Card (NIC), electricity bills, and 1st Appellant’s name in the electoral register

are under the address of the land in question; and hence, the Appellants are

not liable to be ejected from the land in question and therefore, it should be

dismissed in-limine.

However, the learned Additional Magistrate of Colombo in his order dated

27.01.2015 had having held that the Respondent had clearly, stated in the quit

notice (Form A in the schedule to the Act), in the application made to it by him

under section 5(1) of the Act (Form B in the schedule to the Act) and the

affidavit filed therewith by the Respondent (Form C in the schedule to the Act)

that the land morefully, described therein-the subject matter of the application,

is in his opinion, a state land, and therefore, such a preliminary objection had

been raised by the 1st and 2nd Appellants in total misconception and/or

misapprehension of the matters stated thereon by the Respondent, proceeded

to reject the preliminary objection so raised by the 1st and 2nd Appellants as to

the maintainability of the application together with the entirety of the 1st and

2nd Appellants’ showing cause, thereby granting the application thus, directing

eviction of the 1st and 2nd Appellants from the State Land by inter-alia, holding

that the 1st and 2nd Appellants had shown no valid cause as required by section

9(1) of the Act, to the application for ejectment made to it by the Respondent

under section 5(1) of the Act.

CA/PHC/0190/2018

Page 6 of 22

Being aggrieved by the said order of the learned Additional Magistrate of

Colombo dated 27.01.2015, the 1st and 2nd Appellants had invoked the extra-

ordinary revisionary jurisdiction of the High Court of the Province seeking to

revise and set aside it. The learned High Court Judge had by the order dated

24.08.2018, dismissed the respective applications in revision preferred thereto

by the 1st and 2nd Appellants by inter-alia, holding that the respective

applications preferred to the Magistrate Court of Colombo by the Respondent

under the provisions of the Act, were in conformity with the Act for; the 1st and

2nd Appellants had shown no valid defence as required by section 9(1) of the

Act to the application for ejectment made to it by the Respondent under section

5(1) of the Act and hence, the Appellants had disclosed no exceptional

circumstances to invoke the extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction vested in it

to revise and set aside the orders of the learned Additional Magistrate of

Colombo. Hence, the instant appeal to this Court.

Hence, the principal defence raised by the respective Appellants to the

application made to the Magistrate Court of Colombo by the Respondent under

section 5(1) of the Act, is that Land in question is not a State Land within the

meaning of the Act but a land possessed by the grandfather and the father of

the 1st Appellant and thereafter, by the 1st Appellant and his daughter-the 2nd

Appellant in the manner as recited in the statement of showing cause for the

reasons enumerated by them in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of the statement of

showing cause as well as in paragraph 2(a) to (g) of the joint petition of appeal

and as quoted above.

It may now, be examined.

Land is not a State Land within the meaning of the Act but, a land

possessed by the grandfather and the father of the 1st Appellant and

thereafter, by the 1st Appellant and his daughter-the 2nd Appellant in the

manner as recited in the statement of showing cause for the reasons

enumerated by them in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of the statement of showing

CA/PHC/0190/2018

Page 7 of 22

cause as well as in paragraph 2(a) to (g) of the joint petition of appeal and

as quoted above.

It is in this context, I would think it expedient at this juncture to examine the

structure and/or the scheme embodied in the Act and the provisions contained

therein with regard to an application that may be made to a Magistrate Court

by a competent authority under section 5 thereof for the eviction of a person

who in his opinion, is in unauthorized possession or occupation of a state land

and for the recovery of the same.

Section 3 of the Act enacts thus;

“3. (1) Where a competent authority is of the opinion

(a) that any land is State land; and

(b) that any person is in unauthorized possession or

occupation of such land, the competent authority may serve

a notice on such person in possession or occupation thereof,

or where the competent authority considers such service

impracticable or inexpedient, exhibit such notice in a

conspicuous place in or upon that land requiring such

person to vacate such land with his dependants, if any, and

to deliver vacant possession of such land to such competent

authority or other authorized person as may be specified in

the notice on or before a specified date. The date to be

specified in such notice shall be a date not less than thirty

days from the date of the issue or the exhibition of such

notice.

(1A) No person shall be entitled to any hearing or to make any

representation in respect of a notice under subsection (1).

(2) Every notice under subsection (1) issued in respect of any

State land is in this Act referred to as a "quit notice ".

CA/PHC/0190/2018

Page 8 of 22

(3) A quit notice in respect of any State land shall be deemed

to have been served on the person in possession or

occupation thereof if such notice is sent by registered post.

(4) Every quit notice shall be in Form A set out in the

Schedule to this Act.”

Section 4 of the Act deals with the obligation to comply with a quit notice and it

enacts thus;

“4. Where a quit notice has been served or exhibited under section 3

(a) the person in possession or occupation of the land to whom such

notice relates or any dependants of such person shall not be entitled to

possess or occupy such land after the date specified in such notice or to

object to such notice on any ground whatsoever except as provided for in

section 9,

(b) the person in possession or occupation shall together with his

dependants, if any, duly vacate such land and deliver vacant possession

thereof to the competent authority or person to whom he is required to

do so by such notice.”

Section 5 of the Act deals with the effect of non-compliance with a quit notice

and it enacts thus;

5. (1) Where any person fails to comply with the notice provisions of

section 4 (b) in respect of any quit notice issued or exhibited or

purporting to have been issued or exhibited under this Act, any

competent authority (whether he is or not the competent authority who

issued or exhibited such notice) may make an application in writing in

the Form B set out in the Schedule to this Act to the Magistrate's Court

within whose local jurisdiction such land or any part thereof is situated

(a) setting forth the following matters

CA/PHC/0190/2018

Page 9 of 22

(i) that he is a competent authority for the purposes of this

Act.

(ii) that the land described in the schedule to the application

is in his opinion State land,

(iii) that a quit notice was issued on the person in possession

or occupation of such land or was exhibited in a

conspicuous place in or upon such land,

(iv) that such person named in the application is in his

opinion in unauthorized possession or occupation of such

land and has failed to comply with the provisions of the

aforesaid paragraph (b) of section 4 in respect of such notice

relating to such land, and

(b) praying for the recovery of possession of such land and for an

order of ejectment of such person in possession or occupation and

his dependants, if any, from such land.

(2) Every such application under subsection (1) shall be supported by an

affidavit in the Form C set out in the Schedule to this Act verifying to the

matters set forth in such application and shall be accompanied by a copy

of the quit notice.

(3) Every application supported by an affidavit and accompanied by a

copy of the quit notice under the preceding provisions of this section

shall be referred to as an " application for ejectment ".

(4) No stamp duties shall be payable for any application for ejectment.

Section 6 of the Act deals with the role of a Magistrate upon receipt of an

application made under section 5 thereof and it enacts thus;

“6. (1) Upon receipt of the application made under section 5, the

Magistrate shall forthwith issue summons on the person named in the

CA/PHC/0190/2018

Page 10 of 22

application to appear and show cause on the date specified in such

summons (being a date not later than two weeks from the date of issue of

such summons) why such person and his dependants, if any, should not

be ejected from the land as prayed for in the application for ejectment.

(2) The provisions contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure Act shall,

mutatis mutandis, apply to the issue of summons referred to in

subsection (1) and the service thereof and other steps necessary for

securing the attendance of the person summoned.”

Section 7 of the Act makes provisions for an order for ejectment where no

cause is shown and it reads thus;

“7. If on the date specified in the summons issued under section 6 the

person on whom such summons was issued fails to appear or informs

the Court that he has no cause to show against the order for ejectment,

the Court shall forthwith issue an order directing such person and his

dependants, if any, to be ejected forthwith from the land.”

Section 8 of the Act makes provisions as to the inquiry if cause is shown and it

enacts thus;

“8. (1) If a person on whom summons has been served under section 6

appears on the date specified in such summons and states that he has

cause to show against the issue of an order for ejectment the Magistrate's

Court may proceed forthwith to hear and determine the matter or may

set the case for inquiry on a later date.

(2) Where any application for ejectment has been made to a Magistrate's

Court, the Magistrate shall give priority over all other business of that

Court, to the hearing and disposal of such application, except when

circumstances render it necessary for such other business to be disposed

of earlier.”

Section 9 of the Act deals with the scope of inquiry and it reads thus;

CA/PHC/0190/2018

Page 11 of 22

“9. (1) At such inquiry the person on whom summons under section 6

has been served shall not be entitled to contest any of the matters

stated in the application under section 5 except that such person

may establish that he is in possession or occupation of the land

upon a valid permit or other written authority of the State granted

in accordance with any written law and that such permit or

authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid.

(2) It shall not be competent to the Magistrate's Court to call for any

evidence from the competent authority in support of the application

under section 5.” [Emphasis is mine]

Section 10 of the Act makes provisions for order of ejectment and it reads as

follows;

“10. (1) If after inquiry the Magistrate is not satisfied that the person

showing cause is entitled to the possession or occupation of the land he

shall make order directing such person and his dependants, if any, in

occupation of such land to be ejected forthwith from such land.

(2) No appeal shall lie against any order of ejectment made by a

Magistrate under subsection (1).”

Upon a careful analysis of sections 3(1), 4, 5(1) and 6 of the Act in conjunction

with sections 9(1) which enacts that “At such inquiry the person on whom

summons under section 6 has been served shall not be entitled to contest

any of the matters stated in the application under section 5 except that

such person may establish that he is in possession or occupation of the

land upon a valid permit or other written authority of the State granted in

accordance with any written law and that such permit or authority is in

force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid” and 9(2) thereof,

which enacts “It shall not be competent to the Magistrate's Court to call

for any evidence from the competent authority in support of the

CA/PHC/0190/2018

Page 12 of 22

application under section 5.”, it would become manifestly, clear that where

the competent authority is of the opinion that; a) any land is state land, and

b) that any person is in unauthorized possession or occupation of such

land or any part thereof, the competent authority may serve a quit notice by

any of the modes set out therein on such person in possession or occupation

thereof, requiring such person to vacate such land with his dependents if any,

and to deliver vacant possession of such land to competent authority or any

other authorized person as may be specified in the notice on or before a

specified date to be specified therein; and that where any person fails to comply

with the quit notice as required by section 4 of the Act, any competent

authority may under section 5(1) of the Act, make an application in writing in

the Form B set out in the schedule to the Act to the Magistrate Court within

whose local jurisdiction such land or any part thereof is situated setting forth

the matters stated in 5(1)(a) and (b) of the Act; and that at such inquiry the

person on whom summons under section 6 has been served shall not be

entitled to contest any of the matters stated in the application under

section 5 except that such person may establish that he is in possession

or occupation of the land upon a valid permit or other written authority

of the State granted in accordance with any written law and that such

permit or authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered

invalid; and that It shall not be competent to the Magistrate's Court to call

for any evidence from the competent authority in support of the

application under section 5. [Emphasis is mine]

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in Farook vs. Gunewardene-Government

Agent, Amparai 1980 (2) SLR 243, at pages 245 and 246 that, “Section 9(2)

is to the effect that the Magistrate cannot call for any evidence from the

competent authority in support of the application under section 5, which

means that the Magistrate cannot call upon the competent authority to prove

that the land described in the schedule to the application is a State Land

(Section 5(1)(a)(ii))......The structure of the Act would also make it appear that

CA/PHC/0190/2018

Page 13 of 22

where the competent authority had formed the opinion that any land is state

land, even, the Magistrate is not competent to question his opinion. Alternative

relief is given by section 12 which empowers any person claiming to be the

owner of a land to institute action against state for the vindication of his title

within 6 months from the date of the order of ejectment and section 13 is to the

effect that where action is instituted by a person, if a decision is made in favour

of that person, he will be entitled to recover reasonable compensation for the

damage sustained by the reason of his having been compelled to deliver

possession of such land...”.

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA/PHC/41/2010 decided on

31.01.2017 that, “The party noticed is not entitled to challenge the opinion of

the competent authority on any of the matters stated in the application....By

this amendment, the opinion of the competent authority in relation to the state

land was made unquestionable....”.

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA (PHC) APN 29/2016-decided on

09.07.2018 that, “....He cannot contest any of the matters stated in the

application made under section 5 of the Act. One of the matters required to be

stated in the application is that the land described in the schedule to the

application is in the opinion of the competent authority state land. This fact

cannot be contested by the person summoned....Hence, a dispute on the

identity of the land cannot arise for consideration of the learned Magistrate.

The identity of the land can arise for consideration only to the extent of

examining whether the valid permit or other written authority produced by the

party summoned is in relation to the state land described in the application.

Where it is not, the Magistrate must issue an order of eviction in terms of the

Act...”

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA(PHC)48/2016-decided on

02.09.2025 that, “Under section 9 of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession)

Act, as amended in 1983, the competent authority’s opinion that land is a

CA/PHC/0190/2018

Page 14 of 22

‘state land’ is conclusive and not open to judicial challenge at the ejectment

stage and the only permissible defence available to an occupier is to prove

possession or occupation under a valid permit or written authority issued by

the state with the burden of proof resting on the occupier, whose failure to

establish such authority would necessitate an order of ejectment.”

Upon a plain reading of sections 3(1), 4, 5(1) and 6 of the Act in conjunction

with sections 9(1) and 9(2) thereof and the judicial precedents referred to

above, it becomes abundantly, clear that, where the competent authority had

formed an opinion that any land is state land, even, the Magistrate is not

competent to question his opinion and therefore, not open to judicial challenge

at the ejectment stage in an application made to Court by a competent

authority under section 5 of the Act.

In the light of the law set out in sections 3(1), 4, 5(1) and 6 of the Act in

conjunction with sections 9(1) and 9(2) thereof and in the light of the law

established by the judicial precedents as referred to above, it is my considered

view that a dispute as to the identity of the land-the subject matter of the

application under section 5 of the Act, on the premise that the land is not a

state land, is wholly, foreign and utterly alien to a proceedings that may be

initiated before a Magistrate Court by a competent authority for eviction

of a person who in his opinion, is in unauthorized possession or occupation of

a land which in his opinion, is state land and therefore, such a defence to an

application made to Court by a competent authority under section 5 of the Act

is wholly, untenable in law, and therefore, not in any manner available to such

a person who in his opinion of the competent authority, is in unauthorized

possession or occupation of a state land for; the Legislature in enacting section

9 of the Act had never intended a defence as such to be made available to a

person as such except only, for the defence expressly, and explicitly, made

available therein by section 9(1) of the Act.[Emphasis is mine]

CA/PHC/0190/2018

Page 15 of 22

There is a further point which would in my opinion, fortify and strengthen my

view taken as aforesaid and let me now, examine it.

Upon a careful analysis of the Act, it becomes abundantly, clear that “Urgency”

appears to be the hallmark of this Act as observed by this Court in Farook vs.

Gunewardene-Government Agent, Amparai (Supra). Under section 3, 30

days notice shall be given. Under section 4, the person in possession is not

entitled to object to notice on any ground whatsoever except as provided for in

section 9 and the person who is in possession is required to vacate the land

within the month specified by the notice. Under section 6, the Magistrate is

required to issue summons forthwith to appear and show cause on a date not

later than two weeks from the date of issue of such summons. Under section

8(2) the Magistrate is required to give priority over all other business of that

court. Under section 9, the party noticed can raise objections only on the basis

of a valid permit issued by the State. Under section 10, if the Magistrate is not

satisfied, “he shall make order directing ejectment forthwith and no appeal

shall lie against the order of ejectment. Under section 17, the provisions of this

Act have effect notwithstanding anything contained in any written law.

Besides, it was inter-alia, held by the Supreme Court in Senanayake Vs.

Damunupola-1982 (2) SLR 621 that, “The scope of the State Land (Recovery

of Possession) Act was to provide a speedy or summary mode of getting back

possession or occupation of ‘State Land’ as defined in the Act”, which was cited

with approval by this Court in case bearing No. CA (PHC) 140/2013-decided

on 10.10.2019.

Hence, it becomes abundantly, clear upon a careful analysis of sections 9(1)

and 9(2) of the Act in particular that the Legislature in enacting this special

piece of legislation, had never intended for a protracted trial to be held by a

Magistrate in an application made to it by a competent authority under section

5 of the Act when it had enacted section 9 thereto expressly, and explicitly,

CA/PHC/0190/2018

Page 16 of 22

setting out in unambiguous terms the scope of such an inquiry and the

defences available to an application made under section 5(1) of the Act.

In the light of the above, the scope of the State Land (Recovery of Possession)

Act is to provide a speedy or summary mode of getting back possession or

occupation of ‘State Land’ as defined in the Act as explicitly, observed by the

Supreme Court in the decision in Senanayake Vs. Damunupola (Supra).

In view of the law set out above, the 1st and 2nd Appellants in the instant

appeal cannot in any manner, contest any of the matters stated in the

application made under section 5 of the Act by the Respondent to the

Magistrate Court of Colombo. One of the matters so required to be stated in the

application under section 5 of the Act is that the land described in the schedule

to the application, is in the opinion of the Respondent being the competent

authority, State Land. Opinion so formed by the Respondent being the

competent authority, that it is in his opinion, State Land, cannot in any

manner, be contested by the Appellant who was summoned under section 6 of

the Act in view of sections 9(1) and 9(2) of the Act.

Hence, dispute on the identity of the land morefully described in the schedule

to the instant application made to Court by the Respondent, being the

competent authority under section 5 of the Act, namely; the land stated in the

instant application is not state land as raised by the 1st and 2nd Appellants in

the showing cause before the Magistrate Court of Colombo, cannot in law, be

raised by them for consideration of the learned Magistrate of Colombo for; they

have expressly, been prevented and precluded by section 9(1) and 9(2) of the

Act by raising a contest as such inasmuch as this is an issue to be adjudicated

upon in appropriate proceedings by a Court of competent jurisdiction for; such

a dispute as to the identity of the land in question, is utterly, foreign and

alien to proceedings as such initiated by the competent authority under

section 5 of the Act. [Emphasis is mine]

CA/PHC/0190/2018

Page 17 of 22

Hence, I would hold that the contention advanced by the 1st and 2nd

Appellants in the Magistrate Court that the land in question is not State Land

but, a land possessed by the grandfather and the father of the 1st Appellant

and thereafter, by the 1st Appellant and his daughter-the 2nd Appellant in the

manner as recited in the statement of showing cause for the reasons

enumerated by them in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of the statement of showing

cause as well as in paragraph 2(a) to (g) of the joint petition of appeal and as

quoted above, is not in any manner, entitled to succeed both in fact and law.

The question that would next, arise for our consideration is as to the scope of

the inquiry in proceedings that may be initiated by a competent authority

under section 5 of the Act in a Magistrate Court and section 9 of the Act sets

out the scope of the inquiry and it may be reproduced verbatim the same as

follows;

“9. (1) At such inquiry the person on whom summons under section 6

has been served shall not be entitled to contest any of the matters

stated in the application under section 5 except that such person

may establish that he is in possession or occupation of the land

upon a valid permit or other written authority of the State granted

in accordance with any written law and that such permit or

authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid.

(2) It shall not be competent to the Magistrate's Court to call for any

evidence from the competent authority in support of the application

under section 5.” [Emphasis is mine]

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in Farook vs. Gunewardene-Government

Agent, Amparai (Supra) that, “At the inquiry before the Magistrate, the only

plea by way of defence that the Petitioner can put forward is that he is in

possession or occupation of the land upon a valid permit or other written

authority of the State granted in accordance with any written law and that

CA/PHC/0190/2018

Page 18 of 22

such permit or authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered

invalid.”

It was inter-alia, held in Muhandiram v. Chairman, No. 111, Janatha

EstateDevelopment Board 1992 (1) SLR 110 at page 112 that, “Under

section 9(1) of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act No. 7 of 1979, the

person on whom summons has been served (in this instance, the Respondent-

Petitioner) shall not be entitled to contest any of the matters stated in the

application under section 5 except that such person may establish that he is in

possession or occupation of the land upon a valid permit or other written

authority of the State granted in accordance with any written law and that

such permit or written authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise

rendered invalid...... The said section clearly reveals that at an inquiry of this

nature, the person on whom the summons has been served has to establish

that his possession or occupation is upon a valid permit or other written

authority of the State granted according to the written law. The burden of proof

of that fact lies on that particular person on whom the summons has been

served and appears before the relevant Court.”.

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA/PHC/41/2010(Supra) that, “Under

section 9 of the State Land (Recovery of Possession) Act, the scope of the

inquiry is limited to the person noticed to establish he is not in unauthorized

occupation or possession by establishing that;

1. Occupying the land on a permit or a written authority.

2. It must be a valid permit or a written authority.

3. It must be in force at the time of presenting it to Court.

4. It must have been issued in accordance with any written law.”

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA (PHC) APN 29/2016(Supra) that, “A

person who has been summoned in terms of section 6 of the Act can only

establish that, he is in possession or occupation of the land upon a valid

permit or other written authority of the State granted in accordance with any

CA/PHC/0190/2018

Page 19 of 22

written law and that such permit or authority is in force and not revoked or

otherwise rendered invalid. He cannot contest any of the matters stated in the

application under section 5 of the Act.”

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA(PHC)48/2016 (Supra) that, “.... the

only defence available is to prove possession is upon a valid permit or written

authority, issued in accordance with law, and which should be in force....”.

In the light of the law set out in section 9 of the Act and the judicial precedent

referred to above, at an inquiry of this nature the person on whom the

summons has been served (in this instance the Appellants) has to establish

that their possession or occupation is upon a valid permit or other written

authority of the State granted according to the written law and that such

permit or written authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered

invalid.

It is significant to observe that, it had never been the position of the 1st and 2nd

Appellants adverted to in the Magistrate Court that their possession or

occupation of the land in dispute which in the opinion of the Respondent being

the competent authority is State Land, is upon a valid permit or other written

authority of the State granted according to the written law and that such

permit or written authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered

invalid, but, a land possessed by the grandfather and the father of the 1st

Appellant and thereafter, by the 1st Appellant and his daughter-the 2nd

Appellant in the manner as recited in the statement of showing cause.

However, the Appellants’ argument that the land is not a state land but, a land

possessed by the grandfather and the father of the 1st Appellant and thereafter,

by the 1st Appellant and his daughter-the 2nd Appellant in the manner as

recited in the statement of showing cause filed before the Magistrate Court of

Colombo, cannot sustain for the reason that, they are precluded by section 9(1)

and 9(2) of the Act from raising such a contest on the land-the subject matter

CA/PHC/0190/2018

Page 20 of 22

of the application made to Court by the Respondent being the competent

authority.

On the other hand, the Respondent being the competent authority had already,

formed an opinion that the land-the subject matter of the application, is a

State Land and that the 1st and 2nd Appellants are in unauthorized possession

or occupation therein. However, as observed by me elsewhere in this judgment,

it is significant to note that, not an iota of evidence had been adduced by the

1st and 2nd Appellants to establish that they are in possession or occupation of

the State Land upon a valid permit or other written authority of the State,

granted in accordance with any written law and that such permit or authority

is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid as required by section

9 of the Act. Hence, the 1st and 2nd Appellants did not have semblance of such

a permit or authority as envisaged by section 9(1) of the Act.

In view of the above, it clearly, appears to me that the 1st and 2nd Appellants

had adduced not even an iota of evidence to satisfy the learned Additional

Magistrate of Colombo that they are in possession or occupation of the State

Land upon a valid permit or other written authority of the State, granted in

accordance with any written law and that such permit or authority is in force

and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid as required by section 9(1) of the

Act as rightly, held by the learned Additional Magistrate of Colombo.

Hence, I would hold that, the contention so advanced by the 1st and 2nd

Appellants that, the land in dispute is not a state land but, a land possessed by

the grandfather and the father of the 1st Appellant and thereafter, by the 1st

Appellant and his daughter-the 2nd Appellant in the manner as recited in the

statement of showing cause filed before the Magistrate Court of Colombo, is not

entitled to succeed, both in fact and law and as such, it should be rejected in-

limine.

Besides, upon a careful scrutiny of the quit notice (Form A set out in the

schedule to the Act), the application itself made to the Magistrate Court of

CA/PHC/0190/2018

Page 21 of 22

Colombo by the Respondent under section 5(1) of the Act (Form B set out in the

schedule to the Act), and the affidavit furnished to Court by the Respondent

along with his application (Form C set out in the schedule to the Act), it

becomes abundantly, clear that the Respondent had therein, clearly, and

unequivocally, stated that the land in his opinion, is a state land and that the

Appellants in his opinion are in unauthorized possession or occupation thereof

and as such the Appellants had raised such a contention as raised in

paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of the statement of showing cause in total

misapprehension or misconception of the facts stated therein, as rightly, held

by the learned Magistrate of Colombo and as such the contention so raised by

the Appellants are not entitled to succeed both in fact and law and as such it

should be rejected in-limine as correctly, done by the learned Magistrate of

Colombo.

Hence, I would hold that the learned Additional Magistrate of Colombo was

entirely, justified both in fact and law in making an order directing the 1st and

2nd Appellants and their dependents, if any, in occupation of the State Land as

morefully, described in the schedule to the application made to Court by the

Respondent being the competent authority, to be ejected forthwith therefrom.

In the circumstances, I would see no error both in fact and law in the order of

the learned Additional Magistrate of Colombo and therefore, it can sustain both

in fact and law as rightly, held by the learned High Court Judge of the

Province.

Hence, I would see no error both in fact and law in the order of the learned

High Court Judge of the Province too, when she had proceeded to dismiss the

application in revision filed by the 1st and 2nd Appellants before the High Court

inviting it to invoke its extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction to revise and set

aside the order of the learned Additional Magistrate of Colombo by inter-alia,

holding that, the 1st and 2nd Appellants had not established any plausible

defence to the application made by the Respondent under section 5(1) of the

CA/PHC/0190/2018

Page 22 of 22

Act as required by section 9(1) thereof, and therefore, it is not contrary to law

and as such, they had disclosed no such exceptional circumstances to interfere

with the order of the learned Additional Magistrate of Colombo sought to be

revised and set aside.

In view of the foregoing, I would hold that, the instant appeal is not entitled to

succeed both in fact and law.

Hence, I would proceed to dismiss the instant appeal with costs of this court

and the courts below.

In the result, I would affirm the orders of both the learned High Court Judge of

the Province and the learned Additional Magistrate of Colombo.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL