IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal from

the High Court in terms of

section 331 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act.

Hon. Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

C.A. Case No. HCC/187/19 Complainant

High Court of Kegalle

Case No. 3804/17 Vs.

Wewathenne Siriniwasa

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Wewathenne Siriniwasa Accused Appellant

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant-Respondent

2

BEFORE : K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J (P/CA)

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J

COUNSEL : Niroshan Mihindukulasuriya for the Accused-Appellant

Chathurangi Mahawaduge, SC for the Respondent

WRITTEN SUBMISSION

TENDERED ON : 07.10.2020 (On behalf of the Accused-Appellant)

04.05.2021 (On behalf of the Respondent)

ARGUED ON : 09.08.2022

DECIDED ON : 13.09.2022

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J. The accused-appellant was indicted in the High Court of Kegalle and

convicted for the charges of;

1. on or about 24th August 2010 kidnapping Jayalath Pedige Dilini

Prasangika Gunarathne who is under the age of 16 years from

the legal custody of Horathal Pedige Priyanka Rathnakanthi,

and thereby committing an offence punishable under section

354 of the Penal Code.

2. During the course of the same transaction, committing grave

sexual abuse to Jayalath Pedige Dilini Prasangika Gunarathne

who is below the age of 16 years, an offence punishable under

section 365B(2)(b) of the Penal Code.

This appeal is preferred against the said convictions and sentences.

Prior to the hearing, written submissions were filed on behalf of both

parties. At the hearing of the appeal, the learned counsel for the

appellant and the learned State Counsel for the respondent made oral

submissions.

3

In brief, the facts of the prosecution case.

At the time of the incident, the victim was 13 years and 11 months

old. She was living with her parents and three brothers. The appellant

was a Buddhist monk and a teacher of the Sunday school at "Atugoda

Temple," and the victim was a student there. Evidence reveals that the

appellant had an inappropriate relationship with the victim. The

victims house was only 100-150 meters away from this temple.

On the day of the incident, according to the prosecution, the appellant

had met the victim when she was coming from her aunts house and

had told her that he would be coming in the night of the same day to

meet her. Accordingly, the appellant had come to the house of the

victim around 10 p.m. where she was sleeping with her parents and

three brothers. The appellant had talked to the victim through a

window and had asked her to come outside of the house to meet him.

Thereafter, he had taken her to the Dharma Shalawa at the temple.

The appellant then asked her to lie down on a mat, which the victim

refused to do but the appellant insisted on. Then, the appellant lifted

the skirt worn by the victim and put his male organ between the

victims thighs and moved up and down.

When the victims mother (PW2) awoke in the night, she noticed that

her daughter was missing. Then she informed the victim's father, and

the father and victim's elder brother went to the temple, where they

found the victim and brought her back to her home. Soon after, the

victim lodged a complaint at the Kegalle police station against the

appellant.

Following grounds of appeal have been urged by the appellant in his

written submission:

4

1. The prosecution has failed to prove the ingredients of the first

charge.

2. The learned trial Judge has failed to evaluate the credibility of

the victim.

3. The prosecution failed to lead evidence in corroboration of the

evidence of PW1.

Based on the aforesaid grounds, the learned counsel for the appellant

made submissions regarding the probability of the prosecution story,

not considering the appellants more probable version, the uncertainty

in describing the sexual offence by PW1, and the absence of

corroborative evidence also.

Probability of the prosecution story

The main argument of the learned counsel for the appellant was that

the evidence of the victim was not credible. His position was that this

is a fabricated story. The learned counsel contended that when the

victim was sleeping with her parents and her brothers, the appellant

coming to her house and talking through a window is improbable. The

learned counsel for the appellant contended that the defence version

is more probable.

The learned State Counsel contended in reply that the victims

evidence which has no contradictions or omissions is reliable and

probable. Therefore, she stated that the argument that the defence

version is more probable has no basis.

The position taken up by the appellant in his evidence was that the

victim came to his temple on her own and he never asked her to come.

According to the said position, even the appellant admits that the

victim was with him in the temple at night. The issue whether she

5

went to the temple on her own or whether she went with the appellant

at his request would be dealt with later. However, I cannot see any

improbability of the appellant going to the victims house at night and

asking her to come to the temple if the appellant wanted to have sex

with her. At the same time, I should say that there is no improbability

in the appellants version as well. However, there is no basis to accept

the argument that the defence version is more probable than the

prosecution version. Hence, there is no issue as to the probability of

the prosecution story.

Whether there is a discrepancy or uncertainty in describing the sexual

offence?

During the cross-examination of the PW1, no contradiction has been

marked, no omission has been brought to the notice of the court.

However, the learned counsel for the appellant pointed out the

different words used by PW1 to describe the sexual act on two

different occasions. His contention was that PW1, the victim stated in

her evidence that the appellant put his male organ on her thighs and

moved up and down between the thighs but in the short history given

to the doctor, she stated that the accused had rubbed his male organ

on her legs. Therefore, the learned counsel contended that the said

inconsistency runs to the root of the case which in no uncertain terms

blemishes the credibility of the victim.

When questioned about that, PW1 stated, "I stated as I could

understand what had been done to me.". Her explanation appears as

follows:

,

.

(page 52 of the appeal brief)

6

Without any hesitation, her explanation could be accepted as a very

clear explanation. At the time of the incident, she was 14 years old.

Furthermore, no one can be expected to use the same words in 2018

when giving evidence that were used in 2010 when explaining the

incident to the doctor.

In addition, any reasonable man could understand the statement

moving male organ up and down through the thighs has no

difference from the statement rubbing male organ on her legs

because the thighs are at the upper part of the legs. In fact, PW1 has

also stated this in the following way:

:

?

: .

: ?

: . .

(Page 53 of the appeal brief)

So, there is absolutely no discrepancy or uncertainty in describing the

sexual offence. Therefore, I regret that I am unable to accept under

any circumstances the argument that the said inconsistency runs to

the root of the case and blemishes the credibility of the victim.

Whether PW1s evidence requires corroboration?

Another argument advanced by the learned counsel for the appellant

was that the victims evidence has not been corroborated by other

evidence. The learned counsel contended that at the time of the

alleged incident, the victims father and elder brother had come to the

7

Dharma Shalawa and had shouted at the accused and dragged the

victim to the house and that it is clear that both the father and

brother are the best eye-witnesses to corroborate the evidence of PW1.

The learned State Counsel submitted in reply that PW1s evidence has

been corroborated by the evidence of PW2, PW5, PW7 and PW11.

Further, it was contended that although the victims father and

brother were not called in evidence, the prosecution has made a

strong case against the appellant. The learned State Counsel also

pointed out that no particular number of witnesses are required for

the proof of any fact according to section 134 of the Evidence

Ordinance.

In an offence of this nature, there could be no medical evidence to

corroborate the victims evidence. In her testimony, the Judicial

Medical Officer stated that no injuries could be found in this kind of

sexual abuse. If the father or the brother of the victim or both of them

were called in evidence what they could say is that the victim was in

the temple and they brought her back to the home. The fact that the

victim came to the temple and met the appellant was admitted by the

appellant in his evidence. While denying the allegation against him,

the appellant said that he spoke to her for 3-4 minutes. In addition,

the appellant himself admitted that the victims brother and father

came to the temple, scolded and threatened him and had taken back

the victim. Therefore, there was nothing to corroborate by calling the

father and brother of the victim in evidence.

It is correct that on certain occasions, our courts have held that it is

unsafe to admit victims evidence in respect of sexual offences without

corroboration. However, it was held in the Indian case of Bhoginbhai

Hirjibhai V. State of Gujarat AIR S.C. 753 that In the Indian setting,

8

refusal to act on the testimony of a victim of sexual assault in the

absence of corroboration as a rule, is adding insult to the injury.

It is needless to state that sexual offences are not committed in public.

Therefore, it is natural that there would be hardly any eye-witnesses

to testify about the sexual abuse. In the case of Gurcharan Singh V.

State of Haryane AIR (1972) SC 2661 also, it was observed that in

this type of cases court normally looks for some corroboration. It was

held thus:

As a rule of prudence, however, court normally looks for some

corroboration of her testimony so as to testify its conscience that she

is telling the truth and that the person accused of rape on her has not

been falsely implicated.

The substance of the said decision was that corroboration is needed to

prevent false implications. In the case at hand, the fact that the victim

came to him is admitted by the appellant. The appellant also stated

that he spoke to her for 3-4 minutes. Hence, the identity of the

appellant is not an issue in this case. The only issue is whether he

sexually abused her or he only spoke to her for 3-4 minutes.

In the case of Sunil and another V. The Attorney General (1986) 1

Sri L.R. 230, it went on to state that It is very dangerous to act on the

uncorroborated testimony of a woman victim of a sex offence, but it

was held further that but if her evidence is convincing, such evidence

could be acted on even in the absence of corroboration.

The following judicial authorities clearly held that a conviction for

sexual offences could be arrived on the uncorroborative evidence of

the victim.

It was held in the cases of The King V. Themis Singho 45 NLR

378, and Premasiri and another V. The Queen 77 NLR 85 that In a

charge of rape, it is proper for a Jury to convict on the uncorroborated

9

evidence of the complainant only when such evidence is of such a

character as to convince the Jury that she is speaking the truth.

In Regina V. W.G. Dharamasena 58 NLR 15, it was held that

In a charge of rape, it is not in law necessary that the evidence of the

prosecutrix should be corroborated.

Accordingly, the law permits either to act on corroborated or

uncorroborated evidence in determining sexual offences. What expects

from a trial Judge is to carefully analyze whether corroboration is

needed or not. In the case before us, the appellant's identity was not

an issue, and it was established even by the appellant's evidence

because the appellant had admitted that he talked with PW1 when

she came to the temple at night on the day in question. The complaint

regarding the offence was made promptly. Only the sexual abuse

committed by the appellant must then be proved in order to establish

the second charge. As previously stated, there would be no evidence to

corroborate the act of sexual abuse as nobody witnessed it. That has

to be proved only on PW1's evidence. Other incidental matters need no

corroboration for the reasons stated previously. Hence, I hold that

there is no issue regarding the corroboration.

Would the appellants evidence cast reasonable doubt on the

prosecution case?

The substance of the appellants evidence is very simple. He says that

PW1 came to the temple on her own, that he only spoke with her for

3-4 minutes, and that he did nothing to her. However, the central

issue here is that this position has never been suggested to the victim

when she was cross-examined. It was not suggested to PW1 that when

she was coming from her aunt's house, the appellant did not tell her

that he would come at night. It was not suggested to PW1 that the

appellant did not come to her house at night and ask her to come to

the temple. PW1 was not suggested that she did not go to the temple

10

with the appellant when the appellant asked her to go. At least, she

was not suggested that she came to the temple on her own.

An observation of the Indian judgment of Sarvan Singh v. State of

Punjab - (2002 AIR SC (iii) 3652) at pages 3655 and 3656, has been

cited in the case of Ratnayake Mudiyanselage Premachandra v. The

Hon. Attorney General - C.A. Case No. 79/2011, decided on

04.04.2017 as follows: It is a rule of essential justice that whenever

the opponent has declined to avail himself of the opportunity to put

his case in cross-examination, it must follow that the evidence

tendered on that issue ought to be accepted.

In the case of Himachal Pradesh v. Thakur Dass - (1983) 2 Cri. L. J.

1694 at 1701 V. D. Misra CJ held that whenever a statement of fact

made by a witness is not challenged in cross-examination, it has to be

concluded that the fact in question is not disputed. Similarly, in

Motilal v. State of Madhya Pradesh - (1990) Criminal Law Journal

NOC 125 MP, it was held that absence of cross-examination of

prosecution witness of certain facts, leads to inference of admission of

that fact.

During the cross-examination, it was only suggested to the PW1 that

the appellant had not sexually abused her and the evidence regarding

sexual abuse is false. The victims evidence, how the appellant asked

her to come to the temple and how she went with him to the temple at

night has never been challenged in cross-examination. In

consequence, the aforesaid unchallenged prosecution evidence must

be accepted because in absence of the appellants position being even

suggested to the PW1 in cross-examiation, it amounts to an admission

of the prosecution version according to the decisions of the aforesaid

judicial authorities. So, it is obvious that the appellants version,

11

which was taken only at the tail end of the case, cannot be accepted

and thus the said version casts no doubt on the prosecution case.

Evidence given by children

The appellant's counsel also contended that after the incident, when

the mother, PW2, asked what had happened, the daughter, PW1, said

nothing. The learned counsel attempted to show that PW1 remained

silent because nothing happened. However, according to the mothers

evidence, only at that moment, her daughter did not say anything. In

a short while, the mother, father and daughter went to the police

station and lodge a complaint about the sexual abuse.

At the time of the incident, PW1 was a 14-year-old child. In the case of

Thimbirigolle Sirirathana v. OIC, Police Station, Rasnayakepura - CA

No. 194/2015, decided on 07.05.2019, it was discussed the behavior

of a child who had experienced sexual abuse. It was held in this case

that when a child is sexually assaulted by an adult, it is also natural

for the victims family to think twice before making a complaint to the

police. But in the instant action, there was no delay in making a

complaint. Also, it was held that in cases of sexual offences, Courts

have found that victims of sexual offences can react in different ways.

Some may complain immediately. Others may feel for example afraid,

shocked, ashamed, confused, or even guilty and may not speak out

until some time has passed. There is no typical reaction. (Crown Court

compendium part 1, May 2016). So, this is a natural response of a

child who faced such a situation. Therefore, the mothers evidence

that the daughter said nothing soon after she came from the temple

with her father and brother cast no doubt on her evidence.

The trial Judges findings should not be lightly disturbed

In the aforementioned Court of Appeal judgment, it was also held that

The trial Judge before whom the witnesses testified is the best person

12

to decide on the credibility of the victim and the other witnesses, as he

observed the demeanor and deportment of the witnesses.

It is vital to note at this stage that this is a rare occasion in which the

learned Judge who wrote the judgment has heard the case from

beginning to end. It has been held in several cases such as King Vs.

Gunaratne 14 Ceylon Law Recorder 174, Fradd Vs. Brown & Company

20 NLR 282 at 283, State of Uttar Pradesh Vs. M. K. Anthony (1984)

SCJ 236/(1985) CRI L.J. 493 at 498/499, Oliver Dayananda

Kalansuriya alias Raja Vs. Republic of Sri Lanka CA 28/2009

(13.02.2013), Wickramasuriya V. Dedolina (1996) 2 Sri L.R. 95, and

Alwis V. Piyasena Fernando (1993) 1 Sri L.R. 119 at 122, that the

testimonial trustworthiness of witnesses is a matter for trial Judge

and a considered finding of a trial Judge will not be disturbed by an

Appellate Court lightly.

In addition, it should be noted that in a country with a cultural and

social background like ours, being a victim of sexual abuse leaves a

scar on a 14-year-old girls entire future. So, under any

circumstances, no girl would be tempted to fabricate a story for this

kind of offence, implicating a monk by making her own future dark.

The other argument advanced by the learned counsel for the appellant

that the defence evidence has not been considered has no merit

because when perusing the impugned judgment, it is apparent that

the learned High Court Judge has considered the the appellants

evidence, defence position taken up during the prosecution case, and

after evaluating the evidence, the learned Judge has set out his

findings with reasons. As the learned Judge carefully analyzed the

appellants evidence, he observed contradictions P2, P3, and P4 that

cast strong doubts on the appellants testimony.

13

For the reasons stated above, I hold that the learned High Court

Judge has rightly convicted the appellant for the grave sexual abuse

charge.

Whether the ingredients of the first charge have been proved?

The next matter to be decided is the first charge of kidnapping. The

learned counsel for the appellant contended that the prosecution has

failed to prove the ingredients of the first charge. The learned counsel

contended that because the victim and the appellant had a close

relationship, there was no kidnapping and the victim and the

accused-appellant planned to meet during the night. He argued that

the charge of kidnapping is not fulfilled in the absence of "take or

entice."

Submitting the case of P. Sirisena and 2 others V. Sub Inspector of

Police 75 NLR 322, the learned State Counsel for the respondent

contended that although the victim had willingly gone outside of the

house as a response to the appellant summoning her through the

window, her consent is immaterial, as the victim was a minor.

Firstly, the appellants version that the victim went to the temple on

her own without the knowledge of the appellant could not be accepted,

as there was no suggestion even to the victim on behalf of the defence

that she came to the temple on her own.

Secondly, if she went willingly when the appellant asked her to come

to the temple, the offence of kidnapping is committed by the appellant

because according to the decision of the said case, P. Sirisena and 2

others V. Sub Inspector of Police, The taking of a minor for the

purpose of contracting a marriage, upon a false pretense that she was

a major, without the knowledge of her parents, was taking her away

for an improper purpose. It was immaterial that the minor consented

or went willingly, for a minor cannot validly consent to the

14

substitution of some other person's control for the control which is

exercised over her by her lawful guardian. Accordingly, it was held in

the said case that the appellants were liable to be convicted of

kidnapping the minor from the lawful guardianship of her mother.

In the case at hand also, the appellant had taken the PW1 for an

improper purpose of sexually abusing her. Hence, as a minor, PW1s

consent is immaterial.

Committing the offence of Kidnapping in respect of a minor has been

extensively discussed in the Indian case of S. Varadarajan V. State of

Madras 1965 AIR 942 (Also 1965 SCR (1) 243), Decided on 09

September 1964. The headnote of the said case reads as follows:

Where a minor girl, alleged to be taken away by the accused

person, had left fathers protection knowing and having capacity to

know the full import of what she was doing and voluntarily joined the

accused, it could not be said that the accused had taken her away

from the keeping of her lawful guardian within the meaning of section

361 of the Indian Penal Code. Something more had to be done in a

case of that kind such as an inducement held out by the accused

person or an active participation by him in the formation of the

intention, (emphasis added)

In the case before us, the appellant had taken away the girl from the

lawful guardianship of her mother in order to form his immoral

intention. Thus, the offence of kidnapping is committed.

At this stage, it is pertinent to compare section 361 of the Indian

Penal Code and section 352 of the Sri Lankan Penal Code. Except for

the age limits of male and female minors, Section 361 of the Indian

Penal Code is identical to Section 352 of the Sri Lankan Penal Code.

For convenience, the two sections are reproduced below.

15

Section 361 of the Indian Penal Code

Whoever takes or entices any minor under sixteen years of age if a

male, or under eighteen years of age it a female, or any person of

unsound mind, out of the keeping of the lawful guardian of such

minor or person of unsound mind, without the consent of such

guardian, is said to kidnap such minor or person from lawful

guardianship .

Section 352 of the Sri Lankan Penal Code

Whoever takes or entices any minor under fourteen years of age if

a male, or under sixteen years of age it a female, or any person of

unsound mind, out of the keeping of the lawful guardian of such

minor or person of unsound mind, without the consent of such

guardian, is said to " kidnap such minor or person from lawful

guardianship ".

The observations of the case Rex V. James Jarvis reported in XX Cox's

Criminal Cases, 249 in respect of the offence of kidnapping have been

cited in the said Indian Judgement as follows:

Jelf J., has stated the law thus to the jury:

Although there must be a taking, yet it is quite clear that an

actual physical taking away of the girl is not necessary to render the

prisoner liable to conviction; it is sufficient if he persuaded her to

leave her home or go away with him by persuasion or blandishments.

In view of the aforesaid decisions, it is evident that in the instant

action, the offence of kidnapping is committed when the appellant

willingly or unwillingly takes the PW1 to the temple. Hence, the

learned High Court Judge has correctly convicted the appellant for the

first count as well.

16

Sentencing

The only other matter that remains to be considered is the sentence

imposed on the appellant. The learned High Court Judge sentenced

the appellant to 4 years simple imprisonment for the first count and

suspended the same for 15 years, and imposed 11 years simple

imprisonment for the second count. The Honourable Attorney General

has not appealed against the sentence.

However, this court could consider whether its intervention is required

to vary the sentence because the appellant preferred the appeal

against the conviction as well as the sentence. In addition, it was

pleaded in the petition of appeal that the sentence imposed on the

second count is excessive. This court feels that an intervention on the

sentence is needed for three reasons. Firstly, the sentence imposed on

the second count is illegal, as rigorous imprisonment is mandatory for

the offence under section 365B(2)(b) of the Penal Code. Secondly, I am

of the view that the sentence imposed on the second count is

inadequate in light of the nature and circumstances on which the

grave sexual abuse was committed. Thirdly, the sentence passed on

the first count is also illegal because according to section 303(2)(d) of

the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, the term of imprisonment should

not exceed two years in order to suspend the sentence. In this case,

the learned Judge imposed 4 years simple imprisonment for the first

count and suspended for 15 years.

Accordingly, this court informed the learned counsel for the appellant

that further time could be granted to forward reasons why the

sentence on the second count should not be enhanced, if the

convictions are affirmed. However, the learned counsel for the

appellant informed this court that he does not want further time and

17

submitted the reasons on the same day, why the sentence should not

be enhanced, if the convictions are affirmed.

Now, I consider the submissions made by both counsel regarding the

sentence. The minimum sentence for the second count is seven years

imprisonment and the maximum is twenty years. The learned counsel

for the appellant submitted that the learned trial Judge has

considered the midpoint, 12 years, of the period of imprisonment and

deducted one year, as the appellant had no previous convictions. The

learned counsel also submitted that the appellant was a priest and a

teacher. He also stated that no damage has been caused to the victim

as a result of this offence.

The learned State Counsel for the respondent contended that

committing this kind of offence as a priest and a teacher is a highly

aggravating factor and the learned High Court Judge has not

considered the same. Advancing on her argument, the learned State

Counsel stated that this is a fit case to enhance the sentence.

The learned High Court Judge has made an observation before

passing the sentence that although the breach of discipline is a

relevant issue in monastic life, breach of discipline by the accused is

not considered at all in passing the sentence. It should be noted that a

child who goes to a monk, not like going to an ordinary person,

expects guardianship and has more confidence that the monk will do

no harm to her. Furthermore, the accused-appellant was a teacher in

the Sunday school and PW1 was a student there. Hence, it is my

considered view that sexually abusing the girl who came to the monk

who was also her teacher is more serious than abusing the girl by an

ordinary person. So, this is an aggravating factor the learned Judge

should have considered.

18

The learned Judge has considered not having previous convictions

and repentance for committing the offence as mitigatory factors. In

this case, the accused-appellant pleaded not guilty to the charges and

after the trial, the learned High Court Judge found him guilty. I do not

find here any evidence of repentance on the part of the appellant.

In addition, although the learned counsel submitted that no damage

has been caused to the PW1, there is a strong possibility to cause

psycalogical damage to a child who was sexually abused like this. The

psycological damage is not visible. Therefore, psycological damage to a

sexually abused child is difficult to detect and cannot be estimated. It

is a known factor that some psycological damages could last for her

life time. In this case, there is no evidence whether such psycological

damage was caused to the PW1. However, the fact that no physical

damage had been caused to her cannot in anyway be used as a

mitigatory factor for the reasons stated above.

Undoubtedly, the aforesaid circumstances compel this court to

enhance the sentence for the second count. Considering the mitigating

and aggravating factors, I hold that 15 years of rigorous

imprisonment is an appropriate, lawful sentence which is correct in

principle as well.

Therefore, the convictions on both counts are affirmed. The sentences

imposed by the learned High Court Judge are varied as follows: The

sentence imposed on the second count is enhanced to 15 years

Rigorous Imprisonment. The rest of the sentence; the fine,

compensation, default sentences and the amount ordered to be paid

to the Victims of Crime and Witnesses Assistance and Protection Fund

under the Assistance to and Protection of Victims of Crime and

Witnesses Act, No. 04 of 2015 as well as the default sentence remain

19

unchanged. The sentence, fine and the default sentence imposed on

the first count is affirmed. However, the learned Judge has suspended

the said sentence. The suspension of the said sentence is removed.

Instead, the said sentence is ordered to run concurrently with the

sentence for the second count imposed by this court.

The appeal is dismissed. The sentences on counts one and two are

varied to the above extent.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K. Priyantha Fernando, J (P/CA)

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL