IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRAIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Court of Appeal No.

CA (PHC) 300/2006

High Court of Kurunegala

No. HCR 100/2004

Magistrate Court Kurunegala

No. 81548

Percy Denipitiya,

City Undertakers (Pvt) Ltd.,

Hospital Junction, Kurunegala.

Accused - Petitioner - Appellant

v.

1. The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

1 st Respondent - Respondent.

1

2. Assistant Commissioner of Labour,

District Labour Office,

Kurunegala.

Before

Counsel

Complainant - Respondent - Respondant

: P.R.Walgama J.

: L.T.B. Dehideniya 1.

: Accused Petitioner Appellant absent and unrepresented

: Suranga Wimalasen SSC for the Respondents.

Argued on : 15.02.2016

Decided on : 13.06.2016

L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

The Complainant Respondent - Respondent (hereinafter called and

referred to as the Respondent) filed a certificate in the Magistrate Court of

2

Kurunegala under section 38(2) of the Employees Provident Fund (EPF)

Act to recover the unpaid EPF to one employee G.J.D.A.Malwana . He was

in employment in the institute named City Undertakers from 1971 to 1993.

The said institute has now been converted to City Undertakers Private

Limited. The Accused Petitioner Appellant (hereinafter called and referred

to as the Appellant) was the owner of the City Undertakers as well as the

new institute called City Undertakers Private Limited. The certificate filed

against the Appellant.

The Appellant was given the opportunity to show cause and after

considering the facts and circumstances and the relevant law, the Learned

Magistrate allowed the application of the Respondent. Being aggrieved by

the said order, the Appellant moved in revision in the High Court of

Kurunegala where the Learned High Court Judge has affirmed the order of

the learned Magistrate. This appeal is from the order of the High Court.

On the day fixed for argument, the appellant was absent and

unrepresented. Notices issued on Appellant under registered cover for

several times and finally his Attorney at Law was also informed and

thereafter the Appellant was represented by a Counsel on 06.10.2015. the

Court fixed this case for argument on 15.02.2016 in the presences of

Counsel for both parties. On the date of argument, the Appellant was absent

and unrepresented. The Court heard the submission of the learned Counsel

for the Respondents and on the direction of the Court, filed written

submissions too.

The Respondent filed the certificate in the Magistrate Court under

section 38(2) of the EPF Act.

Atchuvely Multi-Purpose Co-Operative Society Ltd. V. S.

Balasingham 72NLR 180, is a case where a sum of money was due under an

award made under the Co-operative Societies Ordinance is sought to be

I!

II

J

~.i f II

!

fIirt II IlIf fI

3

recovered in terms of the provisions of section 53A (4) of the Co-operative

Societies Ordinance. The court observed that the Court has no option but to

direct that writ of execution do issue, not upon a decree or order entered by

Court but on the award filed before it.

In the case of Abdulally v. Additional Government Agent, Jaftna 68 NLR

168 it was held that;

When a Government Agent issues to a Magistrate a certificate in

terms of section 4 (1) of the Heavy Oil Motor Vehicles Taxation

Ordinance for the recovery of unpaid tax, the Magistrate's Court is

merely a collecting agency and it is not necessary that a charge

should be framed against the accused

In the case of Duraiappah v. The Municipal Commissioner Jaffana 73

NLR 230 it was held thet;

Where a Municipal Commissioner makes an application to a

Magistrate in terms of section 226 (6) of the Municipal Councils

Ordinance to recover a sum certified by an auditor to be due from a

person as a surcharge, the Court acts in an administrative capacity

and has no jurisdiction to hold any judicial inquiry relating to the

surcharge.

Section 38(3) of the EPF Act provides that the certificate filed under

section 38 is sufficient evidence that the amount due under this Act from the

defaulting employer has been duly calculated and that such amount is in

default and the contents of the certificate cannot be called in questin in

Court. The section 38(3) reads thus;

(3) The correctness of any statement in a certificate issued by the

Commissioner for the purposes of this section shall not be called in

question or examined by the court in any proceedings under this

section, and accordingly nothing in this section shall authorize the

f

~i!II

t

1i

f iI t t I\

f,,

*

\ 4

court to consider or decide the correctness of any statement in such

certificate, and the Commissioner's certificate shall be sufficient

evidence that the amount due under this Act from the defaulting

employer has been duly calculated and that such amount is in default.

Under these circumstances I see no reason to interfere with the

finding of the Learned High Court Judge. The appeal dismissed without

costs.

Judge ofthe Court of Appeal

P.R. Walgama J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

I

r

IIIliII

I

f i

f f , t