Page 1 of 6

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

Kokmaduwa Parana Gunawathie of No.10, Chinakoratuwa Mada Road,

Galle. Petitioner Vs.

1. Welendawa Acharuge Priayantha

Alison 2. Minha Wadood Alison 3. Welendawa Acharige Alison All of No .40, Hemananda Mawatha,

Galle.

Respondent

AND BETWEEN

1. Welendawa Acharuge Priayantha

Alison 2. Minha Wadood Alison 3. Welendawa Acharige Alison All of No .40, Hemananda Mawatha,

Galle. Respondent-Petitioners

Vs.

Kokmaduwa Parana Gunawathie of No.10, Chinakoratuwa Mada Road, Galle. PetitionerRespondent

AND NOW

1. Welendawa Acharuge Priayantha

Alison 2. Minha Wadood Alison 3. Welendawa Acharige Alison All of No .40, Hemananda Mawatha,

Galle. Respondent-Petitioner-Appellants

Court of Appeal Case No: CA (PHC) 207/14

Provincial High Court of Galle Case No: Rev/11/2013

Magistrates Court of Galle Case No: 93243

Page 2 of 6

Vs.

Kokmaduwa Parana Gunawathie of No.10, Chinakoratuwa Mada Road, Galle. Petitioner-Respondent-

Respondent

Before: Prasantha De Silva, J. K.K.A.V. Swarnadhipathi, J.

Counsel: Ashan Stanislaus AAL with Crshivah Jabir AAL instructed by P.H.A. Hettiarachchi for the Respondent-Petitioner-

Appellant. Dr. Sunil Cooray with Buddika Gamage for the Petitioner- Respondent-Respondent. Parties agreed to dispose the matter by way of written submissions. Written Submissions 27.07.2019 by the Respondent-Petitioner-Appellants. tendered on: 07.02.2022 by the Petitioner-Respondent-Respondent. Decided on: 04.10.2022

Prasantha De Silva, J.

Judgment

This appeal stems from the Order dated 11.11.2014 made by the learned High Court

Judge of the Southern Province holden in Galle in case bearing No. Rev/11/2013,

which was filed against the Order of the Magistrates Court of Galle in case bearing

No. 93247.

It appears that the Petitioner-Respondent-Respondent above named (hereinafter

sometimes referred to as Respondent) had instituted Magistrates Court case

No.93247 on 17th July 2012 by filing a private plaint in terms of Section 66(1)(b) of

the Primary Courts Procedure Act No.44 of 1979, alleging inter-alia;

That she purchased premises No.10, Centre Road, Cheenakoratuwa, Galle for

a sum of Rs.200,000/- which is of more than Rs 300,000/- in value,

That the subject matter of dispute complained is the building standing on the

said premises No.10, which is a divided portion of the land called

Kekiribokkawatta,

Page 3 of 6

That whilst she was in possession of the entire disputed premises, the 1st and

2nd Respondent-Petitioner-Appellants caused obstructions to the

Respondents peaceful possession thereon.

Thereafter, the Respondent had sought the intervention of the Magistrates Court,

To prevent the obstructions caused to her personal possession of the subject

matter; To safeguard the rights and possession of the Respondent therein;

To issue an Order preventing the 1st and 2nd Appellants from entering the

premises.

It was submitted by the Appellants that the complaint made by the Respondent on

30.06.2012 marked as P4 is an independent statement of the Respondent before she

obtained legal assistance, and that P4 proves beyond any doubt that the Respondent

was occupying only one room in the premises. Moreover, she has accepted the fact

that she was in possession of only one room in the upstairs of the building and the

1st and 2nd Appellants have dispossessed the Respondent from there.

It was further submitted that the Appellants have admitted the fact that the

Respondent was in possession of one room in the premises and the Respondent too

has clearly admitted that. The Appellants have clearly stated in their affidavits and

counter affidavits that the subject matter of the case is only one room of the entire

premises.

However, it was the finding of the learned Magistrate who was acting as the Primary

Court Judge that the Respondent and the 3rd Appellant (deceased) had been in

possession of the disputed premises for a long period of time.

3

, 2012

.

It is worthy to note the said position is substantiated by the complaints made by the

Respondent on 30.06.2012 marked 4 and the subsequent complaint dated

12.07.2012.

Page 4 of 6

The said complaint 4 states;

. ,

. .

.

.

.

.

.

Moreover, the Respondent had made another complaint to the Galle Police Station

on 12.07.2012, which states;

. .

. 2012.07.12

8.30 ,

..

According to the said complaints, it clearly demonstrates that the Respondent had

been in possession of the upper floor of the disputed premises and 1st and 2nd

Appellants were also in possession of the same.

In terms of Section 68(1) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act,

Where the dispute relates to the possession of any land or part thereof it

shall be the duty of the Judge of the Primary Court holding the inquiry to

determine as to who was in possession of the land or the part on the date of

the filing of the information under Section 66 and make order as to who is

entitled to possession of such land or part thereof.

Section 68(1) of the Act is concerned with the determination as to who was in

possession of the land on the date on which information was filed in Court.

Since the information (private plaint) had been filed on the 17th of July 2012 and the

aforesaid complaints made on 30th June 2012 and 12th July 2012, it clearly manifests

that the Respondent was in possession of the upper floor of the disputed premises.

Page 5 of 6

Thus, it is seen that according to the evidence placed before the learned Magistrate,

he had come to the correct findings of fact and law and had concluded that the

Appellant is entitled to the possession of the disputed premises except the rooms

rented for Sisira Restaurant and Nalin Cellular.

However, the Appellant had moved in revision to the Provincial High Court of the

Southern Province holden in Galle to revise or set aside the said Order of the learned

Magistrate. It is settled law that revision is an extraordinary jurisdiction vested in

Court to be exercised under exceptional circumstances, if no other remedies are

available. Thus, revision is not available if other remedies are available to the party

concerned.

It is interesting to note the case U.K. Edirimanne Vs. K. Kandiyah and another

appeal bearing No. 1115/84 (unreported), CA Minutes 12.07.1991 where Justice

Wijetunge emphasized:

It seems to me that when the legislature in its wisdom provide in Section

74(2) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act that an appeal shall not lie against

any determination or Order under Part VII of the Act, it intended that a party

adversely affected by such determination or Order should ordinarily seek his

remedy in a Civil Court, as the provision of Section 74(1) appears to suggest.

It is only when there are exceptional circumstances that Court would interfere

with such determination or Order and such situation would be the exception

rather than the rule.

It is to be noted that, it was revealed in evidence and also mentioned in the Order

of the learned Magistrate that the Appellants had instituted action bearing

No.16577/L in the District Court of Galle to eject the Respondent from the premises

in dispute.

It has been held in the case of Punchi Nona vs Padumasena and Others [1994] 2

SLR 117, that Primary Court exercising special jurisdiction under Section 66 of the

Primary Courts Procedure Act, is not involved in an investigation of title or the right

to possession, which is the function of a Civil Court. What the Primary Court is

required to do is to take a preventive action and make a Provisional Order pending

final adjudication of rights of the parties in a Civil Court.

Page 6 of 6

It appears that the Appellants had sought another remedy seeking a declaration of

title and ejectment of the Respondent from the premises in dispute. The learned

High Court Judge held against the Appellants and dismissed the application for

revision made by the Appellants as Appellants had not given any reason why the

alternative remedy is not sought. Thus, the Appellants had not shown any

exceptional grounds to invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of the High Court.

Therefore, in view of the aforesaid reasons, we see no reason for us to interfere

with the Order dated 11.11.2014 made by the learned High Court Judge and the

Order made by the learned Magistrate on 14.12.2012.

Hence, we dismiss this appeal with costs fixed at Rs.35,000/-.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K.K.A.V. Swarnadhipathi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL