j 1

" I i I j I i

~ I

1

1

1

I I

.1 1 I I

t t "

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Case No. 1005/1997 (F)

D.C. Kandy Case No. 11568/P

1. Jayasinghage PremarathnaJayasinghe

2. Jayasinghage NandaJayasinghe

3. Jayasinghage DharmaratneJayasinghe

4. JayasinghageJayasinghe

All of Menikdiwela, Kotaliyagoda.

PLAINTIFFS

1. Kotaliyagoda Dharmawansa Thero

2. Jayasinghage Ruperathna

3. J ayasinghage Abeysuriya

4. Jayasinghage Sirisena

5. Rupasarage Jayasena

6. Mailagahawatte Gedara Ukku Amma

7. J ayasingha Gedara Dayarathna

All of Menikdiwela, Kotaliyagoda.

DEFENDANTS

AND NOW

3. J ayasinghage Abeysuriya

6. Mailagahawatte Gedara Ukku Amma (Deceased)

6a. J ayasinghage Abeysuriya

(Substituted 6(a) Defendant~Appellant)

1

7. J ayasingha Gedara Dayarathna

All of Menikdiwela, Kotaliyagoda.

3rd

2 6th and r h DEFENDANT,APPELLANTS f I

,Vs, I

f I , 1. J ayasinghage Premarathna J ayasinghe

c' t , ! ! 2. J ayasinghage N anda J ayasinghe (Deceased) I l 2a. Premarathna J ayasinghe

All of Menikdiwela, Kotaliyagoda.

(Substituted 2(a) Plaintiff, Respondent)

3. J ayasinghage Dharmaratne J ayasinghe

f (Deceased)

3a. Thushara Malinda J ayasinghe INo.25A, Manikdiwela, Kotaliyagoda. !

(Substituted 3(a) Plaintiff, Respondent)

4. J ayasinghage J ayasinghe

All of Menikdiwela, Kotaliyagoda.

PLAINTIFF, RESPONDENTS

AND

r

1. Kotaliyagoda Dharmawansa Thero (Deceased) \ t lao J ayasinghage Ruperathna j (Substituted l(a) Defendant'Respondent)

2. J ayasinghage Ruperathna ( 5. Rupasarage Jayasena (Deceased)

2

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Decided on

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,J.

Sa. R. Ananda ] ayawickrama

All of Menikdiwela, Kotaliyagoda.

(Substituted S(a) Defendant~Respondent)

18\ 2nd and 5th DEFENDANT ~RESPONDENTS

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,J.

Thilan Liyanage with Sudesh Fernando for the 3rd, 6a &:; 7th Defendant-Appellants

D. Akurugoda for 1st to 4th Plaintiff-Respondents

30.07.2018

T

he Plaintiff-Respondents (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "the Plaintiffs")

instituted this action in the District Court of Kandy seeking inter alia a partition of

the subject-matter known as Mantharakaragedera Waththa more fully described in the

schedule to the plaint-see the amended plaint at page 40 of the appeal brief. The original

owner of the corpus was one] ayasinghage Sarana (hereinafter described as Sarana) and the

3rd, 6th and th Defendants in the case who have preferred this appeal to this Court

(hereinafter sometimes referred to as "the Appellants") make a claim to their share of

the land on the basis of devolution of title to them through the 4th Defendant-Sirisena

who traces his own title back to the original owner Sarana. The devolution as claimed

by the Appellants goes as follows vis-il-vis the Plaintiff-Respondents.

The Plaintiffs claimed that the original owner Sarana had three children namely

Sirimala, Sethuwa Weda and Santhara Weda. Sethuwa Weda had among his sons one Rankira

Weda alias Rankira. Was the 4th Defendant-Sirisena-the son of Rankira? This is the

3

question before this Court. Whilst the 4th Defendant asserted that he was Rankira's son,

the Plaintiffs denied that position.

The contention of the 4th Defendant was that he inherited the share of his father Rankira

who was one of the sons of Sethuwa Weda. Sethuwa Weda inherited his share from the

original owner Sarana. It is this inheritance that allegedly devolved on the 4th

Defendant~the predecessor in title of the 3rd, 6th and th Defendants (the Appellants in

the case). The claim of the Appellants before the District Court was that there was

among Sethuwa Weda's issues one Rankira Weda alias Rankira who fathered his only son

Sirisena~the 4th Defendant. After the death of Rankira, his rights in the corpus devolved

on his only son Sirisena~the 4th Defendant who by a deed of transfer bearing No. 356 and

dated 26th November 1959 sold his rights to his wife Ukku Amma~the 6th Defendant.

UkkuAmma passed her rights to her son the 3rd Defendant~Appellant.

The learned District Judge by his judgment dated 28th November 1997 rejects the

devolution by which the Appellants alleged they derived their title and it is against this

finding that the instant appeal has been preferred by the 3rd, 6th and th Defendant~

Appellants.

It was contended on behalf of the Appellants (the 3rd, 6th and th Defendants) that the

4th Defendant~Sirisena first transferred his rights which had devolved on him through

his paternal inheritance, to his wife~the 6th Defendant. This was by a deed of transfer

bearing No. 356 and dated 26th November 1959 for a consideration of Rs. 200~see page

340 of the appeal brief.

Sirisena~the 4th Defendant himself giving evidence stated that he was the son of Rankira

Weda alias Rankira, who had passed away when he was three months old. In order to

show the connection between him and Rankira, Sirisena produced a previous plaint,

which had been filed by Samara Jayasinghe~the father of the Plaintiffs in this case, in an

anterior partition action over the same land. In the 16th paragraph of that plaint Samara

Jayasinghe~the father of the Plaintiffs in this case, points out that Sethuwa Weda~one of the

4

sons of the original owner Sarana had a son called Rankira. Samara ]ayasinghe-the father of

the Plaintiffs in this case, further points out in that plaint that Rankira and he were

brothers. In other words, according to that previous plaint, Rankira whom the 4th

Defendant alleged was his father becomes a paternal uncle of the Plaintiffs in this case.

Though the 4th Plaintiff was reluctant to admit this in the course of his evidence, later

on in cross-examination he had to concede that Sethuwa Weda had a son called Rankira-

see pages 92, 92, 93, 94, 95 and 96 of the Appeal Brief.

Was Rankira Sethuwa's son?

According to Sirisena-the 4thDefendant, Rankira was his father. Sirisena gave evidence on

behalf of his son the 3rd Defendant-Appellant. The aforesaid plaint which manifested

the nexus between Sethuwa Weda and Rankira was marked as 3VI at the trial. As I have

outlined above, apart from the admission in Court on the part of the 4th Plaintiff that

Rankira was the son of Sethuwa Weda, the previous plaint of the current Plaintiffs' father

too establishes this fact. As I said before, this plaint had been filed by the father of the

Plaintiffs ]ayasingedera Samara ]ayasinghe in June 1972 to partition the same land and this

case was withdrawn subsequently-see the plaint at page 336 of the appeal brief. In fact

as was pointed out before, ]ayasingedera Samara ]ayasinghe-the father of the Plaintiffs in

this case describes Rankira as his brother.

Thus there is the admission on the part of the predecessor in title of the Plaintiffs

namely Samara ]ayasinghe that Rankira and he were sons of Sethuwa Weda. The admission

of their privy to the paternity of Sethuwa Weda (one of the original owners) over Rankira

would bind the Plaintiffs. Apart from this admission of his father in a previous plaint,

the 4th Plaintiff too admitted this nexus between Sethuwa Weda and Rankira in Court.

Thus there are two admissions as to the paternity of Sethuwa Weda over Rankira. One was

made out of court by the father of the Plaintiffs in a previous plaint. The other

admission to the same effect was made by the 4th Plaintiff in the instant case.

5

In addition Sjrjsena~the 4th Defendant claimed that Ranldra was his father.

In other words the assertion of the 3rd, 6th and th Defendants that Sethuwa Weda had a

son called Rankira has been established. The admission coming through the plaint in the

previous partition action is admissible against the Plaintiffs under Section 17 (I) of the

Evidence Ordinance, since it is their father who had made this admission.

An admission is defined in Section 17(1) as follows:~

An admission is-

( a) a statement, oral or documentary,

(b) which suggests any inference as to a fact in issue or relevant fact, and

(c) which is made by any of the persons mentioned in Sections 18 to 20, and

(d) which is made in the circumstances mentioned in Sections 18 to 20.

Section 17 of the Evidence Ordinance makes it clear that the only characteristics which

a statement must possess in order to constitute it an admission are (1) that it suggests

an inference as to a relevant fact or a fact in issue, and (2) that it must be made by one of

the persons and in the circumstances "hereinafter mentioned". The fact that Rankira was an

issue of Sethuwa Weda was relevant to the fact in issue in this case because without that

connection Rankira could not have inherited the rights of Sethuwa Weda in the corpus.

Rankira could not have later passed his rights to Sirisena (the 4th Defendant) without the

paternity of Sethuwa Weda over him. It is axiomatic that the paternity of Sethuwa Weda

over Rankira would enable Rankira to pass his paternal inheritance to his son Sirisena-4 th

Defendant. Rankira's own brother jayasingedera Samara jayasinghe who was also the father

of the Plaintiffs in this case, in an admission made in his plaint dated June 1972 stated

that Rankira and he were children of Sethuwa Weda. The link between Sethuwa Weda (the

father) and Rankira (the son) is thus admitted in an out of court statement made by the

father of the Plaintiffs in that plaint dated June 1972. This hearsay statement made by

the father of the Plaintiffs is admissible against his sons (the Plaintiffs) under an

6

exception to the hearsay rule which is contained in Section 17 (1) of the Evidence

Ordinance.

In this context Section 21 of the Evidence Ordinance is also applicable.

"Section 21 of the Evidence Ordinance permits all admissions to be proved as against the maker

or his representative in interest"/see H.N.G. Fernando,]. (as His Lordship then was) in

Emjay Insurance Co. Ltd v.James Perera (1957) 61 N.LR.145.

Section 18 (3) of the Evidence Ordinance could also be equally invoked to admit the

admission in the plaint.

So the statement in the previous plaint is provable against the Plaintiffs and I would

once again reiterate that this relevant and admissible evidence is strengthened by the

fact that even in Court the 4th Plaintiff admitted that Sethuwa was the father of Rankira.

Despite the fact that Sethuwa's interest would devolve on Rankira owing to the

relationship of father and son between Sethuwa and Rankira, I emphasize the fact that

another son of Sethuwa Samara Jayasinghe admitted in his plaint of June 1972 that Rankira

was his brother. This admission was no doubt against the proprietary interest of

Samara Jayasinghe but yet he admitted that Rankira was his brother. If someone makes a

statement against his proprietary interest, the statement is provable against him and

his successors in title. This is the effect of Sections 18 (3)(a) and 21 of the Evidence

Ordinance.

Sections 18 (3)(a) and 21 of the Evidence Ordinance enact rules as to admission by a

party to the proceeding or his predecessor in title as follows:-

18 (3) Statements made by/

(a) persons who have any proprietary or pecuniary interest in the subject/

matter of the proceeding, and who make the statement in their character

of persons so interested; or

(b) persons from whom the parties to the suit have derived their interest in

the subject/matter of the suit,

7

\ I I

~ !

\ I

are admissions if they are made during the continuance of the interest of the

persons making the statements.

In my view the statement made by the father of the Plaintiff~Respondents to this

appeal in his plaint dated June 1972 falls fair and square under Section IS (3) of the

Evidence Ordinance. It is admissible against the Plaintiffs under both heads~Sections IS

(3)(a) and IS (3)(b) of the Evidence Ordinance. Section 21 would render the admission

in the plaint of June 1972 provable against the Plaintiffs of this case since it is their

father's binding admission against them. Section 21 of the Evidence Ordinance in its

chapeau begins thus:~

"Admissions are relevant and may be proved as against the person who makes them or his

representative in interest, but they cannot be proved by or on behalf of the person who

makes them or by his representative in interest."

I have said that the out of court statement of the father of the Plaintiffs in this case in

his plaint of 1972 would fall under Section IS (3)(b) of the Evidence Ordinance as well.

Persons from whom the parties to the suit have derived their interest in the

subject~matter of the suit. (Section IS(3 )(b

In terms of the subsection two conditions must be present:~

(i) Statements of persons from whom the parties to the suit have derived their

interest in the subject~matter of the suit, are admissions if they are made

during the continuance of the interest of the persons making the statements.

(ii) It should have been made at a time when the maker had an interest in the

property in question (S.lS(3)(b.

Accordingly a statement of a person from whom the Plaintiffs have derived their

interest is admissible. An illustration is found in case law: An Insurance Company

sought to repudiate a claim made by the administrator of the estate of a deceased

holder of a policy of life insurance on the ground that the deceased had made a false or

incorrect declaration, being the basis of the contract, as to the state of his health at the

8

time of the declaration. The issue was whether this declaration could be proved as an

admission. It was held that a statement made by the deceased subsequently, but to the

effect that he had been suffering from certain symptoms at or about the time of the

declaration, was an 'admission' provable under Section 18 and 21 of the Evidence

Ordinance~see Emjay Insurance Co. Ltd v. James Perera (supra).

In the above case, H.N.G. Fernando, J. having cited English cases on the point of

admissibility of statements made by deceased persons as admissions against

representatives in interest, was of the opinion that, "I am satisfied from reference to the

English cases that the English Law rendered an "admission" by a deceased person receivable without

regard to the question whether it fulfilled the requirements which are mentioned in our section 32, and

that accordingly it would be wrong to suppose that there was any intention to restrict the scope of

section 18 only to statements of persons who are alive".

H.N.G. Fernando, J. further held that Sections 17 to 21 and Section 32 respectively

constitute independent heads of admissibility in regard to the reception of statements

of deceased persons and therefore the conditions set out in Section 32 do not have to be

fulfilled in the case of such statements which are within the terms of Sections 18 and 21

of the Evidence Ordinance~Also see a perceptive article by P.B. Carter entitled Hearsay,

Relevance and Admissibility: Declarations as to State of Mind and Declarations against Penal Interest

103 L.Q.R 106.

Thus, admissions may be made in the first instance by a party to the proceeding himself, or

it may be an admission falling into one of the categories of vicarious admissions. Sections

18 of the Evidence Ordinance gives one of the instances of vicarious admissions in that

it indicates that not only an agent but also a predecessor in title of a party to a suit can

vicariously bind such party to the proceedings, by virtue of an admission which has

been made out of court.

Thus no birth certificate is necessary to prove the first link in the devolution of title

that the Defendant~Appeliants alleged~namely Sethuwa Weda and Rankira were father and

9

son. The plaint dated June 1972 establishes that nexus and the 4th Plaintiff in this case

himself conceded this link in the course of the trial.

The purpose of the above discussion is to demonstrate as to how the same items of

evidence in a case (the two admissions I have pinpointed above) may become relevant

and admissible under various provisions of the Evidence Ordinance, which are

inclusionary in nature.

We have now looked at the relationship between Sethuwa Weda and Rankira. Rankira no

doubt inherits Sethuwa Weda's interest in the land. Sethuwa's interest would also devolve

on Jayasinghe~the father of the Plaintiffs. The next question in this case is whether

Rankira's interest passed on to Sirisena (the 4th Defendant). Sirisena asserted that he was

a son of Rankira who passed his rights to him.

The nexus between Rankira and Sirisena

This question pertains to the 2nd link in the chain of devolution. Did Rankira pass on his

rights to Sirisena~the 4th Defendant in the case? Was Rankira the father of Sirisena? There

was no out of court statement made by Rankira that comes to the rescue of Sirisena~the

4 th Defendant.

It is the 4th Defendant~Sirisena who has asserted that Rankira was his father. He testified

that Rankira's share devolved on him and he passed it on to his wife (the 6th Defendant)

from whom their son 3rd Defendant inherited it.

Sirisena~the 4th Defendant asserted in evidence that Rankira's rights passed on to him

because he was Rankira's only son. Was Sirisena~the 4th Defendant in fact Rankira's son?

This is the pivotal question in the case because as it turns out Sirisena himself effected a

transfer of his alleged paternal inheritance to his wife Ukku Amma (the 6th Defendant ) in

1959. Sirisena could have passed on his rights to his wife Ukku Amma (6th Defendant in

the case) only if he had inherited the rights of Rankira to transfer.

10

f I

It is the argument of the Plaintiffs that since Sirisena did not establish the paternity of J

Rankira over him, he could not have passed Rankira's rights to Ukku Amma. r

I must observe that it was around this issue that much of the arguments in the appeal I

took place. It transpired in evidence that Sirisena did transfer his alleged paternal rights r

to his wife Ukku Amma~the 6th Defendant in the case by 6Vl.

In the deed of transfer which was effected by Sirisena in favour of his wife (6VI), an

recital is made that Sirisena was transferring his paternal rights to his wife~the 6th

Defendant~see the deed of transfer (6VI) bearing No. 556 and dated 26th November 1959

which recites that Sirisena was transferring rights which had devolved on him by right

of inheritance from his deceased father 1ayasingedera Rankira Weda~see page 340 of the

Appeal Brief. The deed of transfer marked as 6VI further recites that the 4th Defendant

was in possession of the land which had devolved on him by right of inheritance from

his deceased father 1ayasingedera Rankira Weda~see page 340 of the Appeal Brief. The deed

was executed on 26th November 1959. The plaint was filed in this case almost 25 years

later in 1985. The assertion of title had thus been made long before the litigation arose

between the parties. The deed (6VI) was indeed ante litem motam According to

Black's Law Dictionary (9th Edition) p 107, the expression ante litem motam would mean

"before an action has been raised" i.e., at a time when the declarant had no motive to lie.

This phrase was generally used in reference to the evidentiary requirement that the acts

upon which an action is based occur before the action is brought.

The learned Counsel for the Plaintiff~Respondents argued that the statement in the

deed was insufficient to establish that Sirisena~the 4th Defendant in the case was

fathered by Rankira. He contended that Sirisena~the 4th Defendant must have produced

his birth certificate to show his filial connection to Rankira.

I hasten to point out that he certainly placed evidence at the trial against the

proprietary interest of the Plaintiffs and the deed was not challenged at all by raising

the routine objection "subject to proof" on the part of the Plaintiffs when it was marked

11

J I I i

~ \ 1 i

J I I I f I j 1 1 I l 1

J ! ,

1 ,

J l

~ J I

I i

as 6VI~see page 160 of the Appeal Brief. Sirisena was parting with an interest he alleged

he had derived from his father Rankira who was admittedly the uncle of the Plaintiffs

and the fact remains that the Plaintiffs permitted this deed to be marked and led

against them without any demur or objection. Sirisena claimed in this deed that Rankira

was his father and certainly that representation was made long before the litigation

arose between the parties. Is the representation in the deed relevant and admissible?

Before I deal with this issue, the question that one would have to pose is whether there

was not any other evidence at all that was led to prove that Rankira was Sirisena's father.

In fact when Sirisena gave evidence, it was put to him by the Plaintiffs in cross~

examination that there was no birth certificate available with him to establish the fact

that Rankira fathered him~see page 171 of the Appeal Brief.

In the appeal before me even the learned Counsel for the Plaintiff~Respondents argued

that the birth certificate was the only mode of proof of the paternity of Rankira over

Sirisena. In Sri Lanka, no doubt a certified copy of or a certified extract from a

registration entry in the registers of births or deaths shall be received as prima facie

evidence of the birth or death~see Section 57 of Births and Deaths Registration

Ordinance. A birth certificate affords prima facie evidence of the matters stated therein

but it is not the only mode of proof of paternity or maternity. It is not conclusive of the

facts stated therein and Sections 32(5), 32(6) and 50 of the Evidence Ordnance are also

relevant to ascertain the relationship of one person to another.

Let me first begin with Section 50 which is an exception to the rule against opinions.

Opinion evidence is relevant and admissible under Section 50 of the Evidence

Ordinance, which states as follows:~

"When the Court has to form an opinion as to the relationship of one person to another, the

opinion, expressed by conduct, as to the existence of such relationship of any person who, as a

member of the family or otherwise, has special means of knowledge on the subject, is a relevant

fact:

12

I

f ! [

I !

\' I

i f I , , ! 1 I

\

f I ! !

Illustrations to the Section go as follows:~

a) The question is, whether A and B were married. The fact that they were usually received

and treated by their friends as husband and Wife is relevant.

b) The question is, whether A was the legitimate son of B. The fact that A was always treated

as such by members of the family is relevant.

This section provides an exceptional way of proving a relationship. It makes admissible

as evidence the opinion of a person who could testify as to the relationship. Opinion

evidence is usually excluded as inadmissible but if such opinion could be brought

under Sections 45 to 51, it becomes relevant and admissible.

In order to establish the paternity of Rankira over Sirisena (the 4th Defendant), Section

32 of the Evidence Ordinance too could be invoked. Section 32 is an exception to the

rule against hearsay. An out of court statement made by a person is led in evidence

under Section 32 of the Evidence Ordinance. Usually out of court statements are shut

out as hearsay but if such out of court statements fall under exceptions to hearsay rule,

which are set out in Sections 17 to 39 of the Evidence Ordinance, they become relevant

and admissible. Those statements, when led under these exceptional sections, could be

acted upon by courts as substantive evidence. In other words Courts can act on the

truth contained in those out of court statements.

Then under what section of the Evidence Ordinance would the statement made by

Sirisena in his deed fall?

Clause (5) of Section 32 is to the following effect 'When an out of court statement

relates to the existence of any relationship by blood, marriage, or adoption between

persons as to whose relationship by blood, marriage or adoption the person making the

statement had special means of knowledge, and when the statement was made before

the question in dispute was raised then that statement becomes relevant and

admissible. The Court can act on its truth.

13

The Clause (5) of Section 32 lays down two conditions, which qualify its scope. The

two vital conditions are:-

(1) The statement must be one made by a person having special means of

knowing the relationship to which it relates, and

(2) It must have been made ante litem motam, i.e., made by him before the

question in dispute was raised.

In regard to condition (1) above, Sinnetamby J. in Cooray v. Wijesuriya (1958) 62

N.LR. 158, states that:-

"Apart from proof of a pedigree by the production of birth, death and marriage certificates, the

relevant provisions of the Evidence Ordinance in regard to proof of a pedigree are to be found in

sections 32(5), 32(6) and 50(2) (sic). It is under this provision of law (section 32(5)) that oral

evidence of pedigree is generally sought to be led. What practitioners and the Court sometimes

lose Sight of is the fact that before such evidence can be led there must be proof that the hearsay

evidence sought to be given is in respect of a statement made by a person having special

means of knowledge,furthermore, it must have been made ante litem motam. Where the

statement is made by a member of the family, such knowledge may be inferred or even presumed,

but where it is a statement made by an outsider proof of special means of knowledge must first be

established. "

Two further points may be observed. (i) Although Section 32(5) applies to hearsay

evidence of oral statements made by persons having special means of knowledge, the

Courts of Ceylon have adopted the attitude that relatively greater weight can be

attached to written statements made by such persons. (ii) A statement as to pedigree

admissible under Section 32(5) has some probative value, but its effect is tentative, in

view of the possibility of rebuttal.

In Silva v. Silva (1942) 43 N.LR. 572, Soertsz J. held that, "the statements in a birth

certificate afford prima facie proof of the fact of birth, of the date of birth, the place of birth and the

identity of the person registering the birth. Where the declaration is made by the father it has a 14

I i I

I I

\ l I j I

\

1 1 \ I I 1 I i i I

J I I I I

genealogical value under section 32(5) of the Evidence Ordinance. But, of course, in regard to both these

matters, they are open to rebuttal, and, therefore, the next question is whether there has been

satisfactory rebuttal".

A special knowledge is to be presumed in the case of members of the family. Statements

made by deceased members of a family are admissible in evidence to prove pedigree if

they are made before there was anything to throw doubt upon them. The statement

must have been made before any controversy arose~ante litem motam~see Clarice Fonseka

v. Winifred Perera (1957) 59 N.L.R. 364.

So in a nutshell let me once again advert to the two sections under which Sirisena could

establish his filial relationship with Rankira.

The head note to the case of Cooray v. Wijesuriya 62 N.L.R. 158 states the following:~

"Apart from proof by the production of birth, death and marriage certificates, the relevant

provisions of the Evidence Ordinance in regard to proof of a pedigree are to be found in sections

32(5),32(6) and 50 (2) of the Evidence Ordnance."

Sinnetamby J. (with whom Basnayake, C.J concurred) stated at page 161:~

"It almost always happens that birth and death certificates of persons who have died very long

ago are not available; in such cases: the only way of establishing relationship is by hearsay

evidence."

Whilst Sections 32(5) and 32(6) are exceptions to hearsay evidence, Section 50

contains an exception to the exclusionary rule on opinion evidence.

It is to be noted that Section 50 differs from Section 32(5) in the following respects:~

(a) What is admissible under Section 32(5) is the statement giving the opinion

of a deceased person or a person who cannot be produced, whereas under

Section 50, the relevant fact is the opinion of persons, alive or dead,

expressed by conduct, the qualification of special means of knowledge being

common to both provisions.

15

1 I

\ I 1 1 I

1

1

(b) Under Section 32(5), the statement must be made ante litem motam, but under

Section 50 the opinion may have been expressed before or after the

controversy arose.

So where does the statement in Sirisena's deed fall? Is it under Section 32 or 50? With

regard to this point, the observations made by Sinnetamby J. in Cooray v. Wijesuriya

62 N.LR, 158 at page 162 would be overwhelmingly persuasive and directly in point. To

quote from page 162 of the said judgment of the Supreme Court which is as follows:~

"Indeed such written statements are accepted without question especially when they happen to be

contained in deeds. It is a practice with some notaries to recite the vendor's title in the deed they

attest. For instance, a deed may recite that the vendor's title to a share is derived by inheritance

from a deceased father and the father's name is given. Such a recital being a statement made by a

deceased vendor having special means of knowledge and made ante litem motam would be

admissible to establish relationship: in fact it would be very strong evidence of the family

relationship."

In this case Sirisena (the 4th Defendant) made a statement long before the controversy

arose to the notary that he was the son of Rankira. The notary recorded it in the deed.

There was no challenge to this deed at the trial. The statement was one which was

made out of court to the notary.

The circumstances in which Section 32 (5) would admit the recital in the deed of

Sirisena (the 4th Defendant) into a case are as plain as a pikestaff. The vendor or the

transferor of the deed must have been dead at the time of trial or more specifically when

the deed is sought to be produced at the trial. But here Sirisena was indeed available at

the trial. He testified in behalf of the Defendants. Since he was available at the trial, the

recital in the deed cannot be classified as a statement made by a person who cannot be

called as a witness~see how Sir James Fitzjames Stephen the primogenitor of the Indian

Evidence Act and our own Evidence Ordinance begins Section 32 under the rubric~

"Statements by persons who cannot be called as witnesses".

16

f.

~

\ , 1

t t i i ,

I

I I I

So when the deed was produced at the trial on 29.0l.1997, it was through Sirisena

himself (the vendor in the deed) that the deed was led as evidence. The recital in the

deed dated 26.11.1950 ran as follows:-

"the said premises have been held and possessed by me by right of inheritance from my deceased

father J ayasingedera Rankira Veda."

Though Sirisena made this representation to the notary, out of court in 1950, he himself

produced this deed at the trial. He was available to testify in 1997 and as he was not an

absent witness, the recital cannot fall within Section 32(5), which contemplates an out

of court statement of a deceased or an absent witness. What in effect Sirisena produced

at the trial was a prior statement which he had made to the notary. At this stage it is

crucial to bear in mind the immortal words of Honorable LM.D. de Silva (with Lord

Radcliffe and Lord Tucker agreeing) in an appeal from Supreme Court of Malaya on the

definition of hearsay in Subramaniam v. Public Prosecutor (1956) 1 W.LR 965 (PC)

atp 970.

"Evidence of a statement made to a witness by a person who is not himself called as a witness

mayor may not be hearsay. It is hearsay and inadmissible when the object of the evidence is to

establish the truth of what is contained in the statement. It is not hearsay and is admissible when

it is proposed to establish by the evidence, not the truth of the statement, but the fact that it was

made."

A question of hearsay only arises when the words spoken are relied on

'testimoniallY' ... establishing some fact narrated by the words. (Ratten v. R [1971]

3 W.LR 930 (PC) pp. 933-4)

The crucial difference is that the maker of the recital Sirisena was called to give evidence

and it is him who produced the deed. Therefore the recital cannot constitute hearsay

and therefore Section 32 (5) which is an exception to the hearsay rule cannot apply to

the recital. Then how else does this Court treat this item of evidence?

It would fall within Section SO of the Evidence Ordinance as his special means of

knowledge about his father translated itself into the conduct of making a

'"1

i , I I

I f