==== BLOCKS ==== 

WRT/0083/20

Page 1 of 21

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for writs in the

nature of Certiorari, Mandamus and

Prohibition under Article 140 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

C.A. CASE NO. WRT/0083/20

1. L.A. Samanlatha Pushpakumari,

No. 15/1/1, Temple Road,

Maradana, Colombo 10.

2. R.M. Ushan Pushpakumara Perera,

No. 331/2, Deniya Junction, Suwarapola,

Piliyandala.

3. M. Lahiru Roshana,

No. A 1/1, Sooriyamalpura Flats, Prince

Gate, Colombo 12.

4. A.R.E.R. Rajamanthri,

No. 45, Polhena Road, Yakkala.

PETITIONERS

Vs.

1. University of the Visual & Performing Arts,

No. 21, Albert Crescent, Colombo 07.

2. Prof. W.M. Abeyrathna Bandara,

Competent Authority,

University of the Visual & Performing Arts, No.

21, Albert Crescent, Colombo 07.

WRT/0083/20

Page 2 of 21

3. Dr. Indika Ferdinando,

Dean Faculty of Dance and Drama, University

of the Visual & Performing Arts, No. 21, Albert

Crescent, Colombo 07.

4. Snr. Prof. Sarath Chandrajeewa,

5. Snr. Prof. Mudiyanse Dissanayake,

6. Prof. Michal Fernando,

7. Dr. Sunil Wijesiriwardena,

8. Ashoka Handagama,

4th to 8th all at University of the Visual &

Performing Arts, No. 21, Albert Crescent,

Colombo 07.

9. Asela Rangadewa,

10. Nilakshi De Alwis,

11. Prof. Kusuma Karunarathne,

12. Yamuna Nishanthi Peiris,

13. Ravibandu Vidyapathi,

14. Prof. Dhanapala Owitagedara,

15. Mahinda Wimalasiri,

9th to 15th all at University of the Visual &

Performing Arts, No. 21, Albert Crescent,

Colombo 07.

16. Dr. S.P.D. Liyanage,

Dean-Faculty of Postgraduate Studies,

University of the Visual & Performing Arts, No.

21, Albert Crescent, Colombo 07. 17. Chiltus Dayawansa,

Dean-Faculty of Music,

University of the Visual & Performing Arts, No.

21, Albert Crescent, Colombo 07.

WRT/0083/20

Page 3 of 21

18. M.H. Jagath Raveendra,

Dean Faculty of Visual Arts,

University of the Visual & Performing Arts,

No. 21, Albert Crescent, Colombo 07.

19. Iranga Samindani Silva,

20. Mangalika Jayatunga,

21. C. Maliyadda,

22. Gunasena Thenabadu,

23. Dharmasiri Bandaranayake,

24. B.M.K. Mohottala,

25. T. Dharmarajah,

26. Lakshman Abeyrathne,

19th to 26th all at University of the Visual &

Performing Arts, No. 21, Albert Crescent,

Colombo 07.

27. P.G.S.P. Nanayakkara,

Assistant Registrar-Establishments, University

of the Visual & Performing Arts, No. 21, Albert

Crescent, Colombo 07.

28. B.M. Dayawansa,

Registrar,

University of the Visual & Performing Arts, No.

21, Albert Crescent, Colombo 07.

29. University Grants Commission,

No. 20 Ward Place, Colombo 07.

30. T.P.N.S. Pathirage,

Kokila Asapuwa, Galwala Cross Road,

PadaviWatta, Pothanegama, Anuradhapura.

WRT/0083/20

Page 4 of 21

31. S.A.A. Subhasinghe,

No. 340D, Mahawatta Road,

Himbutana, Angoda.

32. Piyal Kariyawasam,

No. 15/3/1, 1st Lane, Church Road,

Pelawatte, Battaramulla.

33. Dr. T.C. Dandeniya,

No. 8/158, Big City, Balika Nivasa Road,

Rukmale, Pannipitiya.

34. R.G.G.S. Ruppegoda,

No. 129, Bopitiya Road, Delthota.

35. L.N.G.D.S. Wijegunasekara,

"Sandun", Edmond Mawatha,

Eluvila, Panadura.

36. H.T.S. Dissanayake,

"SandaKumudu", Gemunu Mawatha, Honiton

Place, Awissawella.

37. B.W.R.D. Wijeratne,

No. 250/D/37, Wewegodella Watta,

Kalpitimulla, Hunumulla.

38. D.A.K.D. Sunil Shantha,

No. 369/30, Shanti Mawatha, Makumbura,

Pannipitiya.

39. M.P. Sararuk Priyadarshana,

Mahawithikuliya, Withikuliya, Nikaweratiya.

40. R.H. Dissanayake,

No. 16, Wennawatta Road, Wellampitiya.

WRT/0083/20

Page 5 of 21

41. S.M. Satharasinghe,

"SandaKumudu", Gemunu Mawatha, Honiton

Place, Awissawella.

42. M. A.S.B. Manthilake,

No. 36 C, Doragamuwa, Wattegama.

43. M.P. Sandapathi Priyadarshana,

No. 67/1 E, Pani Dodamwatta,

Batawala Road, Weligama.

44. J.A.R. Jayasinghe,

No. 335/D, Bhodirukkharama Road,

Pamunugama, Alubomulla,

Panadura.

45. Prof. Rohana Mahaliyanaarachchi,

The Vice Chancellor,

University of the Visual and Performing Arts,

No. 21, Albert Crescents, Colombo 07.

46. Priyantha Udagedara,

Dean,

The Faculty of Graduate Studies,

University of the Visual and Performing Arts,

No. 21, Albert Crescents, Colombo 07.

47. P.K.S.P. Ratnakumara,

Dean,

Faculty of Music,

University of the Visual and Performing Arts,

No. 21, Albert Crescents, Colombo 07.

48. Prof. Kusuma Karunaratne,

49. Prof. Rohana Lakshman Piyadasa,

50. Prof. Nimal Dangalla,

WRT/0083/20

Page 6 of 21

51. Ranjith Liyanage,

52. J.A.S.P. Aravindana,

48th to 52nd Respondents are

The Members of the Council,

University of the Visual and Performing Arts,

No. 21, Albert Crescents, Colombo 07.

RESPONDENTS

BEFORE : K. M. G. H. KULATUNGA, J.

COUNSEL : Rasika Dissanayake with Shabbeer Huzair, instructed by

Sanjeewa Kaluarachchi, for the Petitioners.

Sandun Nagahawatta, for the 30th to 35th Respondents.

Nayomi Kahawita, SSC, for the State (University of Visual and

Performing Arts).

SUPPORTED ON : 18.03.2025

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON : 28.04.2025 and 12.06.2025

DECIDED ON : 04.11.2025

JUDGEMENT K. M. G. H. KULATUNGA, J.

1. Four petitioners have preferred this application for a writ, inter alia,

seeking writs of mandamus to compel the respondents to recruit them

to the respective posts at the University of Visual and Performing Arts

for which the petitioners applied.

2. The petitioners have, in the course of this application challenged the

recruitment, appointment, and eligibility of the successful candidates

WRT/0083/20

Page 7 of 21

who are named as the 30th - 44th respondents to this application. As

submitted by the petitioners, the 1st respondent named is the University

of the Visual and Performing Arts (“UVPA”); the 2nd respondent was the

Competent Authority of the UVPA and has since ceased to hold office;

and the 3rd respondent is the Dean of the Faculty of Dance and Drama

of UVPA.

3. The 3rd – 8th respondents are the members of the Panel who conducted

the Practical Test in respect of the 1st and 2nd petitioners; the 3rd, 5th,

6th, 9th, and 10th respondents are the members of the Panel who

conducted the Practical Test in respect of the 3rd petitioner; the 3rd, 11th

to 14th respondents are the members of the Panel who conducted the

Practical Test in respect of the 4th petitioner; the 3rd, 4th,5th, 7th, 10th,

and 11th respondents are the members of the Panel who conducted the

interviews on 08.04.2019 in respect of the 1st and 2nd petitioners; the

3rd, 4th, 7th, 10th and 11th respondents are the members of the Panel

who conducted the interviews on 09.04.2019 in respect of the 3rd

petitioner; the 3rd, 4th, 7th, 11th and 12th respondents are the members

of the Panel who conducted the interviews on 18.03.2019 in respect of

the 4th petitioner; the 3rd, 16th -26th respondents were the Members of

the Council of UVPA at the time of filing this application; the 27th

respondent is the Assistant Registrar - Establishments of UVPA, who

was present at the time the respective Interviews pertaining to

certificates were conducted; the 28th respondent is the Registrar of

UVPA; the 29th respondent is the University Grants Commission

(“UGC”); and the 45th respondent is the present Vice Chancellor of

UVPA.

4. It is also submitted that the 16th respondent has ceased to hold the

office of Dean of the Faculty of Graduate Studies, and the 46th

respondent above named has been appointed to the said post; the 17th

respondent has ceased to hold the office of Dean of the Faculty of Music,

and the 47th respondent above named has been appointed to the said

WRT/0083/20

Page 8 of 21

post; and the 19th, 20th, 23rd, and 24th respondents have ceased to hold

the office of the Members of the Council and the 48th, 49th, 50th, 51st,

and 52nd respondents abovenamed have been appointed as the

Members of the Council of UVPA.

5. The petitioners’ main complaint is that when the respective posts were

advertised, there was a letter issued by the UGC [P-17(b)] that there was

a requirement to explore the possibility of absorbing the support staff

who have qualified under categories 1, 2, and 3 of the UGC Circular No.

721. The petitioners’ standing and qualifications at the time of filing

this application appear to be as follows:

a. The 1st petitioner has been employed by the University as an

Instructor (Grade III) since 5th January 2012 and was promoted

to Instructor (Grade II) with effect from 5th January 2017. She is

part of the academic support staff, and her duties have primarily

involved conducting practical sessions and demonstrations in

Miming, an elective subject component within the core discipline

of Acting. Although the petitioner asserts to have introduced

Miming to the University, this was disputed by the University,

which referred to an advertisement (marked R-2) showing that

Miming was an established subject before her appointment. Her

role does not include lecturing responsibilities, as outlined in

UGC Circular No. 988 and relevant University guidelines. While

this case was pending before the Court of Appeal, she applied for

the position of Lecturer (Probationary) in Acting and Performance

but was unsuccessful in 2023.

b. The 2nd petitioner has served as a visiting lecturer at the

University from 16th November 2015 to 18th May 2019. His

engagement was based on semester-specific appointments for a

limited number of hours (e.g., 20, 30, or 45 hours). He is not a

permanent member of the academic staff and was unsuccessful

WRT/0083/20

Page 9 of 21

at interviews held in 2019 for a permanent lecturer post. Despite

having submitted a new application for a vacancy in Play Writing

and Directing in the Department of Drama, Oriental Ballet, and

Modern Dancing, the interview process is yet to be concluded.

c. The 3rd petitioner was a visiting lecturer at the University from

16th November 2015 to 27th March 2020, also on a semester-

based appointment with limited lecture or demonstration hours.

The 3rd petitioner is also not part of the permanent academic staff

and had been unsuccessful at the 2019 interviews.

d. The 4th petitioner was initially appointed as an Instructor (Grade

III) on 15th March 2011 and promoted to Instructor (Grade II) on

15th March 2016. He was later recruited as a Lecturer

(Unconfirmed) in the Department of Kandyan Dance within the

Faculty of Dance and Drama, effective from 23rd December 2021.

His recruitment was carried out under the prevailing academic

staff recruitment scheme adopted by the University Council at its

182nd Meeting on 10th June 2021 (vide R-1).

Facts.

6. This application had been filed on 11.05.2020. The petitioners are

seeking writs of mandamus directing that the petitioners be appointed

to the respective positions they applied for. Simultaneously the

petitioners are also seeking to quash the appointments of the 30th - 44th

respondents. This application has taken over five years to be heard and

determined. The reasons for the delay may be attributable to any of the

parties, which is not relevant. However, the lapse of time has resulted

in certain intervenient circumstances and also a change of

circumstances that has been brought to the notice of this Court.

Considering the overall grounds of challenge relied upon by the

petitioners are broadly twofold: (1) the petitioners not being fairly

afforded an opportunity to face the relevant interviews and practical

tests, and (2) correspondingly, certain respondents who have been

WRT/0083/20

Page 10 of 21

successful in securing employment after the interviews have been

afforded an unfair and unlawful advantage, including members of the

interview panel being biased in their favour.

7. The evaluations consist of varying forms of interviews and practical

tests. In general, such evaluations should be left to the respective

experts and the academic authorities’ discretion, unless there is

material to establish an apparent discrimination or favouritism or bias

that is evident. As far as the complaints of the 1st, 2nd and 4th petitioners

are concerned, apart from the mere general allegations and assertions,

there is nothing tangible or specific to establish that they were singled

out and treated unfairly or targeted and singled out in any form to be

prejudiced. As opposed to that, there is material to establish that the

3rd petitioner was referred to in a telephone conversation between the

9th respondent and the 35th respondent. The details and transcript has

been made available and elicited during the internal inquiry conducted

in this regard. The transcript is tendered by P-28(b). The relevant

portions of the said conversation are as follows:

“අස ේල (9th respondent): …තව එකක් ඉෂු එකක් එන්න නියමිතයි. දැන් ඒ කියන්නන නේ විශ්වවිදයාලයට බඳව ගන්න කට්ටිය. පුද්ගලික පන්ි කරනවද කියලා නක්ස් එකක් එන්න නියමිතයි. හරිද? … ඔයානේ එක නකානහාමද නරජිස්ටර් කරලා ිනයන්නන? නිස ෝෂා (35th respondent): කලායතනයක් විදිහට සර් අස ේල: …නේ දැන් ප්‍රශ්නයක් ඇවිල්ලා ිනයනවා නමාකද කලා ආයතන වල උගන්වන ගුරුවරු නමනහ උගන්වලා ඇතුනලත් උගන්වනවා. ඒනගාල්නලා ඇතුලට ළමයි ගන්නවා. ඒ නිසා ඉන්ටර් වීව් එනකන්ම ඒ ගැන අහනවා කියලා.” “අස ේල: මං එනහම ෆ්නල්වර් කරන්නන් නැහැ. මටත් ඔයාට හේනබනකන් මට විශ්වාස කරන්න බැහැ. … නමුත් ඔයාට එනතන්ට ගිහිල්ලා නහාඳට කේිිෂන් එකක් නදන්න පුළුවන් මට්ටටමට ඔයාව ඩිවලප් කරන එක තමයි මනග ට්‍රයි එක. ඉින් මම දන්නන් නැහැ අන්ිම ඩිසිෂන් එක නමාකක් නවයිද කියලා. දැන් මම ෆයිනල් පැනල් එනකත් නැහැ මම. …

WRT/0083/20

Page 11 of 21

නමුත් ට්‍රයි එකක් නදන්න මම බලන්නන්. මං කැමි නැත්නත් පන්ි වනේ නපෞර්ෂයක් නැි... එනහට නමනහට වැනනන මනුස්සනයක්ව නමනතන්ට එනවට. නමාකද අිට ඊට වඩා නපෞර්ෂයක් ිනයන ගැණිනයක් වුනත් ඊට වඩා නපෞර්ෂයක් ිනයන නකනනක් ඔයා. ප්‍රිපත්ි ිනයන. … ඔයාට තමයි මට සර් ඉවර නවලත් කිව්ව ඉසුරුව නැතුව නිනරෝෂව ගන්න ිබිබ්බනේ නහාඳයි වනේ එකකුත් කිව්වා... ඒ අනුව තමයි මම ජජ් කරන්නන් ඔයාට එන්න පුළුවන් කියන එක. ඒක නිසා. එනහම උනනාත් තව ිකක් ට්‍රයි එකක් ගත්නතාත් ඔයාට සමහරවිට ලකුණු ගන්න පුළුවන් නවයි.” “නිස ෝෂා: සර් මම අර ප්‍රසන්නට්ටෂන් එක චුට්ටටක් හදාගන්න මට සර් චුට්ටටක් උදව් කරනව නන්ද? ඒක නකානහාමද කරන්න ඕනන අස ේල: ඔව් දැන්ම වැඩ පටන් ගන්න දැන්. දැන් ඉින් අද විස්සනන. විසි එකනන. තව සියනන… … මං දැන් සඳුදට ඔෆිස් යනවා සර්. ඊට පස්නස් අගහරුවාදට නකානහාමත් මං නේ බැහැරක් එන්න හදන්නන් කැේපස් එකට සර් ව හේබ නවන්නත් එක්ක. අගහරුවාද වනග සර් … අස ේල: කැේපස් එනක්දි හේබනවන්න… කැමිපස් එනක්දී හේබ හේබනවන්න බෑ... පන්ිත් කැරනකනවා… ගයාන් රුප්නපනගාඩත් කැරනකනවා. මම ගයාන්ටත් මම උදව් කරනවා. නමුත් ගයාන්ටවත් මං ඔයා ගැන කියන්නන් නැහැ.” “නිස ෝෂා: අගහරුවාදට මං එනහනේ සර් එනව සර් චුට්ට ටක් අස ේල: දැන්ම ඉින් කරන නද්වල් කරගන්න. අනනක් එක තමයි මම ඔයාට එව්නව ලකුණු ෂීට්ට එකක්. නිස ෝෂා: ඔව් අස ේල: ඒනක විදිහට ිනයන එදාට ඕන සහිකයි, ඔය ිනයන ික අරන් එන්න. නිස ෝෂා: මං නපෝර්ට්ටනෆාලිනයෝ එක හදල ිනයන්නන. ඒනකත් අඩුපාඩු ිනයනවනේ ඒක ආයිත් බයින්් එකකට ඕන නිසා සර් මට බලල කියන්න. අස ේල: හා හා ඒකත් අරං එන්න.”

8. It is admitted that this matter has been looked into administratively on

a disciplinary basis, and a sanction in the form of a warning has been

meted out to the 9th respondent. As I see, the relevancy of this does not

end there. The 9th respondent is clearly part and parcel of the academic

staff and a member of the interview panel, who at some point was

actively involved in the evaluation and selection of the prospective

candidates to fill the impugned vacancies. The 9th respondent has

stepped in and participated in some form in place of another member

WRT/0083/20

Page 12 of 21

of the interview panel who was not available due to an illness. The 9th

respondent was in the panel which conducted the Practical Test of the

3rd petitioner. The 35th respondent is a successful applicant, who was

appointed.

9. The sum total of the above is that, admittedly, there has been a clear

discussion between the 9th respondent and the 35th respondent directly

in respect of and in relation to the interviews, the parameters and the

scheme in varying degrees. The 35th respondent has without doubt

gained certain information and an undue advantage at the interview

and selection process. On a perusal of the marks allocated to the 35th

respondent as appearing in R-6, it is apparent that the 35th respondent

has been awarded 7.5 marks for creative work, and 6 marks for awards

and scholarships, 7.2 marks for teaching ability, and 17.3 marks for

the Practical Test. The total marks obtained by the 35th respondent at

the Practical Test and interview is 64.3, and it was the recommendation

of the Selection Committee that the 35th respondent be appointed as

Lecturer (Probationary) to the Department of Theatre, Ballet, and

Modern Dance, Faculty of Dance and Drama. The 3rd petitioner, who

was referred to in the abovementioned telephone conversation between

the 9th respondent and the 35th respondent, received a total mark of

51.5.

10. On a comparative analysis of the general marks obtained by the

candidates, I find that the allegation that a higher degree of marks was

awarded to the petitioner is well-founded. This fact is evident on the face

of it. When one considers this in conjunction with the contents of the

telephone conversation and the matters discussed therein, to my mind,

there is a necessary inference that obtaining high marks was, more

probable than not, due to the advantage the 35th respondent gained due

to the information and “support” she received. Secondly, there is a

strong inference that the 9th respondent may have influenced the other

panellists. Correspondingly, the 3rd petitioner had not fared as half as

WRT/0083/20

Page 13 of 21

well in the aforesaid marks comparatively. This clearly corresponds with

the telephone conversation where the 9th respondent did convey to the

35th respondent a desire and intent that the 3rd petitioner should not be

permitted to succeed.

11. However, as far as the 1st, 2nd, and 4th petitioners are concerned, I do

not find any material of such a nature in their favour. Further, as

intimated in the written submissions and brought to the notice of this

Court by the respondents through motion dated 15.07.2025, the

intervening circumstances due to the lapse of time appear to be as

follows:

a. The 1st petitioner has, in the interim, has responded to an

advertisement dated 07.06.2023 for the subject of Acting and

Performance Theory, but had not been successful in acquiring

the required cut-off mark at the interview;

b. The 2nd petitioner has, while this application was pending,

applied to an advertisement dated 13.08.2023 for the subject of

Playwriting and Directing in the Department of Theatre, Ballet

and Modern Dancing. However, due to multiple extraneous

reasons, the recruitment process had come to a halt. It is

submitted that the re-advertisement allowing for those who

applied for the 2023 advertisement (such as the 2nd petitioner) to

reapply will take place in due course; and

c. The 4th petitioner was appointed as a Lecturer (Unconfirmed) for

the Department of Kandyan Dancing with effect from 23.12.2021

(vide letter of appointment R-1).

In these circumstances and in the absence of any positive material

alleging bias, victimisation, or discrimination, this Court is not in a

position to consider the relief prayed for by the 1st, 2nd, and 4th petitioners

directing that they be appointed for the relevant positions.

WRT/0083/20

Page 14 of 21

12. Considering the technical and specialised nature of academic

evaluations, Courts must seldom intervene in matters and decisions

involving such evaluation of qualitative issues of an academic nature. In

this regard, I find the following dicta of Sedley, L.J., in Clark vs.

University of Lincolnshire and Humberside (2000) 1 WLR 1988, cited

in Wade & Forsyth’s Administrative Law (11th Ed. at page 537), relevant:

“The courts will, in any case, be reluctant to enter into ‘issues of academic or pastoral judgement which the University was equipped to consider in breadth and in depth but on which any judgment of the Courts would be jejune and inappropriate. That undoubtedly included such questions as what mark or class a student ought to be awarded or whether an aegrotat was justified.”

13. The above was followed in the case of Abeysundara Mudiyanselage

Sarath Weera Bandara vs. University of Colombo (CA Writ

Application No. 844/2010, decided on 08.06.2018), where A. H. M. D.

Nawaz, J., with P. P. Surasena, J. (P/CA) (as his Lordship then was),

agreeing, held that,

“The consistent judicial opinion, therefore, is that in matters which lie within the jurisdiction of the educational institutions and their authorities, the Court has to be slow and circumspect before interfering with any decision taken by them in connection therewith. Unless a decision is demonstrably illegal, arbitrary and unconscionable, their province and authority should not be encroached upon. This is mainly because of want of judicially manageable standards and necessary expertise to assess, scrutinise and judge the merits and/or demerits of such decisions.” [emphasis added].

However, Dr. Shirani Bandaranayake, J. (as her Ladyship then was), in

Dr. Karunanada vs. Open University of Sri Lanka and Others (2006)

3 Sri L.R. 225 (decided on 31.05.2006), did clearly opine that,

“I am not in agreement with the view that academic decisions are beyond challenge, there is no necessity for the Courts to unnecessarily intervene in matters ‘purely of academic nature’ since such issues are best dealt with by academics who are fully equipped to consider the questions in hand; however if

WRT/0083/20

Page 15 of 21

there are allegations against decisions of academic establishments that fall under the category stipulated in terms of Article 126, there are no provisions to restrain this Court from examining an alleged violation relating to an infringement or imminent infringement irrespective of the fact that the said violation is in relation to a decision of an academic establishment.” [emphasis added].

The present circumstances pertaining to and concerning the 3rd

petitioner, as I see, is an instance where the academic judgement and

ruling may be subject to scrutiny due to apparent bias, and the Court’s

intervention is necessary and warranted.

The 3rd petitioner.

14. The 3rd petitioner applied for the post of Lecturer (Probationary) in

Drama/Oriental Ballet and Modern Dance, indicating a specialisation in

Ballet, Traditional Dance and Modern Dance. He took part in the

Practical Test held on 03.04.2019 before the relevant panel, where he

performed the prescribed items and presented his teaching plan in

English. The presentation slides and lesson plan submitted by the 3rd

petitioner are annexed as P-24(a) and P-24(b). He was thereafter

informed to attend for verification of certificates and to obtain the

marking scheme on 08.04.2019 (vide letter marked P-22).

15. On the perusal of the said certificates and material, it is apparent that

the 3rd petitioner possesses the academic qualifications and teaching

experience in the specific fields advertised. The 3rd petitioner contends

that the marking was not commensurate with the demonstrated

qualifications and performance, as supported by the relevant record in

P-24(a) and P-24(b), as the marks awarded to him in several categories

were lower than those awarded to candidates who did not possess

equivalent specialised qualifications or experience in Ballet and Modern

Dance. On a comparative consideration of the material tendered to this

Court, the said allegation is clearly well-founded.

WRT/0083/20

Page 16 of 21

The marking scheme.

16. The petitioners then contend that the marking scheme applied at the

2019 recruitment was not duly or lawfully approved prior to its

implementation and that the University sought to regularise the same

only subsequent to the challenge being raised in these proceedings. They

submit that the scheme deviated from the previously applicable criteria

without following proper procedural requirements and that its adoption

lacked transparency. The petitioners further assert that the marking

criteria were not disclosed to all candidates on an equal footing;

according to them, access to the scheme was afforded to certain

candidates in advance of the assessments, while others, including the

petitioners, only received it after the Practical Test had been completed.

17. It is submitted on behalf of the respondents that the marking scheme

used in the 2019 recruitment was validly formulated and approved

through the University’s internal governance procedures prior to the

interview process. They state that the University Council took a decision

to revise the existing scheme in December 2018, that a committee was

appointed in January 2019 to prepare the revised criteria, and that the

scheme was formally approved at the Governing Council Meeting No.

161 on 26.02.2019, before the interviews were conducted in April 2019.

According to the respondents, the revised scheme was applied uniformly

to all candidates, with a minimum qualifying threshold of 55 marks out

of 100, and candidates were duly informed of the applicable criteria with

the interview call letter. They further submit that the preparation and

use of such marking schemes fall within the authority of the University,

without requirement for approval by the University Grants Commission.

The respondents therefore contend that the marking process was

transparent, merit-based, and compliant with the relevant regulatory

framework, and reject the allegation that the scheme was irregularly

introduced or unfairly applied.

WRT/0083/20

Page 17 of 21

18. The marking scheme was followed and used during the 2019

recruitment. at that point of time, may not have been formally approved.

However, it has been subsequently adopted and approved by the

Council. It has been retrospectively legitimised, which, until such time,

was utilised. At this juncture, it is not necessary to determine the legality

of the same. However, what is relevant and important is the intimation

made to the prospective candidates as to the marking scheme that was

to be followed. As far as the 3rd petitioner is concerned, he has not been

informed of or the said marking scheme had not been available to him

beforehand. However, it is apparent that the 35th respondent was aware

of the new marking scheme. This is evident from the contents of the

telephone conversation between the 9th respondent and the 35th

respondent.

The assurance given by the 9th respondent.

19. According to the telephone conversation (of which the transcript is

produced marked P-28(b)), the 9th respondent states that the 35th

respondent would be appointed and that the 3rd petitioner would not be

selected. The said conversation suggests that the outcome concerning

the 35th respondent and the fate of the 3rd petitioner had been

contemplated independently of, and prior to, the conclusion of the

interviews and the evaluation process. This material indicates a

departure from an open, merit-based, and impartial assessment process

and supports the contention that the 3rd petitioner was not afforded

equal and fair consideration in accordance with the criteria set out in

the recruitment process but was a victim of a deliberate and pre-planned

act of victimisation.

20. However, the respondents submit that the 9th respondent was not

initially assigned as a member of the interview panel but was included

only due to the sudden illness of a subject expert, Dr. Michel Fernando,

as evidenced by the affidavit marked R-12. While the petitioners rely on

an alleged telephone conversation involving the 9th respondent, the

WRT/0083/20

Page 18 of 21

respondents contend that this recording has no material bearing on the

selection process, on the basis that the marking scheme and criteria

were already communicated to all candidates with the interview call

letter (R-13), ensuring that the selection was conducted transparently

and in accordance with the prescribed criteria. The respondents further

state that, notwithstanding their view that the recording is immaterial

to the legality of the recruitment process, and the University conducted

an internal inquiry into the matter and imposed a suitable disciplinary

sanction on the 9th respondent, including the issuance of a warning

letter (vide documents R-14 and R-15). As stated above, despite taking

disciplinary action, the contents of the conversation is relevant to this

application to establish the alleged bias.

Bias.

21. De Smith’s Judicial Review (8th Ed., at page 535) describes ‘bias’ as

follows:

“Procedural fairness demands... that the decision maker should not be biased or prejudiced in a way that precludes fair and genuine consideration being given to the arguments advanced by the parties. Although perfect objectivity may be an unrealizable objective, the rule against bias thus aims at preventing a hearing from being a sham or a ritual or a mere exercise in ‘symbolic reassurance’, due to the fact that the decision maker was not in practice persuadable.”

22. The doctrine of rule against bias, or nemo judex in causa sua (“no man

is a judge in his own cause”), was explained by Lord Denning, M.R., in

the case of Metropolitan Properties Co. (FGC) Ltd. vs. Lannon, (1969)

1 QB 577, as follows:

“I start with the oft-repeated saying of Lord Hewart, Chief Justice, in Rex v. Sussex Justices (1924 1 KB 256):

“It is not merely of some importance, but is of fundamental importance that justice should not be done, but should manifestly and undoubtedly be seen to be done.”

WRT/0083/20

Page 19 of 21

In Regina v. Barnsley Licensing Justices (1960 2 Q.B. 187), Lord Justice Devlin appears to have limited that principle considerably, but I would stand by it. It brings home this point: in considering whether there was ‘real likelihood’ of bias, Court does not look at the mind of the decision-maker himself. The Court looks at the impression which would be given to other people. Even if, he was as impartial as could be, nevertheless, if right-minded persons would think that, in the circumstances, there was a ‘real likelihood’ of bias on his part, then he should not sit. And if he does sit, his decision cannot stand” [emphasis added].

23. After much discourse, the position of the test on bias in English

administrative law is that determined in the case of Porter vs. Magill

[2001] UKHL 67, which is whether “the fair-minded and informed

observer, having considered the facts, would conclude that there was a

real possibility of bias.” Lord Hope, in Helow vs. Secretary of State For

The Home Department and Another (Scotland) [2008] UKHL 62,

described such a fair-minded and informed observer as follows:

“She is the sort of person who takes the trouble to read the text of an article as well as the headlines. She is able to put whatever she has read or seen into its overall social, political or geographical context. She is fair-minded, so she will appreciate that the context forms an important part of the material which she must consider before passing judgment.”

24. Applying these principles to the present case, the material placed before

this Court includes a recorded telephone conversation involving the 9th

respondent, who participated in the evaluation process, containing

statements suggestive of a predetermined outcome in respect of

identified candidates. Although the respondents contend that the

recording did not affect the assessment and that disciplinary action was

subsequently taken, the test for bias does not hinge upon proof of actual

prejudice or improper motive. The question is whether the

circumstances disclosed give rise to a real possibility of bias in the mind

of a fair-minded and informed observer.

WRT/0083/20

Page 20 of 21

25. For the reasons hereinabove stated, and especially having regard to the

contents of the recording, participation of the 9th respondent in the

interviews and evaluative process, marks allocated, and relevant legal

principles, this Court is satisfied that there has been positive and

unlawful bias that benefitted the 35th respondent and similarly, there

was a real likelihood of bias to the detriment of the 3rd petitioner.

Accordingly, the selection and the appointment of the 35th respondent

as well as the non-selection and non-appointment of the 3rd petitioner

are both unlawful; therefore, they cannot stand and are liable to be

quashed.

Conclusion.

26. In the above circumstances, the petitioners have satisfied this Court

that the petitioners are entitled to the substantive relief as prayed for by

prayers (dd) and (g) and other consequential remedies as prayed for by

prayers (o), (v), and (k) of the petition.

27. Accordingly, this Court hereby grants the following relief:

a. a writ of certiorari, quashing the selection and the appointment of

the 35th respondent to the post of Lecturer (Probationary), and

any other decision incidental thereto as prayed for by prayer (g).

For avoidance of doubt, it is specifically directed that the

quashing of the appointment shall be deemed to be with effect

from the date of this judgement, and the 35th respondent shall be

entitled to retain whatever salaries, emoluments, and pay which

the 35th respondent has in fact worked for and earned;

b. a writ of mandamus, directing the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 16th, 17th, 18th,

46th, and 47th respondents, or the current office-holders of

thereof, to appoint the 3rd petitioner to the post of Lecturer

(Probationary) at the 1st respondent University, as per the

advertisement P-9, from the relevant date applicable thereto, as

prayed for by prayer (dd). However, the 3rd petitioner shall not be

entitled to any pay or allowances, and any other payment for such

WRT/0083/20

Page 21 of 21

period, until the date of the actual commencement of employment

in such post, upon this judgement; and

c. relief sought by prayers (o), (v), and (k), being of a consequential

nature, are also hereby granted as prayed for.

28. Subject to the aforesaid relief, I hold that the petitioners have failed to

provide sufficient material to satisfy this Court that the petitioners are

entitled to the relief sought by the other prayers. Accordingly, the other

relief, other than the relief prayed for by (g), (dd), (o), (v), and (k), are

hereby refused and not granted.

29. Accordingly, this application is partially allowed to that extent.

However, I make no order as to costs.

Application is partially allowed, to that extent.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL