==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Orders in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus

under Article 140 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Dona Theresa Gunawathi Senarathne

alias Senarathne Mudiyanselage Dona

Thilaka Gunawathie Hamine,

No. 23, “Wijayagiri”,

Poregedara, Padukka.

CA (Writ) App. No. 40/2023

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. Hon. Harin Fernando,

Minister of Tourism and Land, “Mihikatha Medura”, Land Secretariat, No. 1200/6, Rajamalwatta Avenue, Battaramulla. 1A. Kuragamage Don Lalkantha,

Minister of Lands, “Mihikatha Medura”, Land Secretariat, No. 1200/6, Rajamalwatta Avenue,

2

Battaramulla. 2. Urban Development Authority,

6th and 7th Floors, “Sethsiripaya”, Battaramulla. 3. Nimesh Herath,

Chairman, Urban Development Authority, 6th and 7th Floors, “Sethsiripaya”, Battaramulla. 3A. L.B. Kumudu Lal,

Chairman, Urban Development Authority, 6th and 7th Floors, “Sethsiripaya”, Battaramulla. 4. Homagama Pradeshiya Sabha,

Court Road, Homagama. 5. Sampath Chaminda Jayasinghe,

Chairman, Homagama Pradeshiya Sabha, Court Road, Homagama. 6. B.A.D. Chinthaka,

Divisional Secretary, Homagama Divisional Secretariat, Court Road, Homagama. 7. G.D. Keerthi Gamage,

Commissioner General of Land,

3

Department of Land Commissioner General, “Mihikatha Medura”, Land Secretariat, No. 1200/6, Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla. 7A. Chandana Ranaveera Arachchi,

Commissioner General of Land, Department of Land Commissioner General, “Mihikatha Medura”, Land Secretariat, No. 1200/6, Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla. 8. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department, Hulfsdorp, Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

Before: Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Counsel:

Upendra Walgampaya instructed by Niluka Dissanayaka for the Petitioner.

Amasara Gajadeera, S.C. for the 1st to 3rd and 6th to 8th Respondents.

Argued on: 20.11.2025

Delivered on: 19.01.2026

4

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Judgement

Introduction

The Petitioner had been the owner of the land morefully described in the Schedule identified as

‘Millagahawatta Amunuwela’ in extent of One Acre and Twenty-Two Perches, which is depicted

in the plan marked and annexed to the Petition as P5. The 1st Respondent, having published notice

under Section 2 of the Land Acquisition Act, No. 9 of 1950 (as amended) (hereinafter referred to

as the “LA Act”) took immediate possession thereof for a public purpose after publishing the

Section 38A notice marked and annexed to the Petition as P6.

The said immediate possession was taken as far back as 19.03.2001. Nevertheless, the said land

has not been utilized by the respondent for the public purpose for which it was acquired to date

(till the Petition was instituted). In addition to that, no compensation has been paid. Therefore, the

Petitioner, who was 87 years old at the time this Petition was made, sought a divesting order in

terms of Section 39A of the LA Act by this Application.

After formal notice was issued, the Respondents filed their respective Objections. It was their

objection that the land is still to be utilized for public purposes, particularly that a shopping

complex is supposed to be set up on the land, and therefore the application should be dismissed.

After counter affidavits were filed, the matter was argued before me and His Lordship Justice

Karalliyadde. However, due to his untimely death, the parties and counsel agreed to have the

judgement prepared and delivered by me. Hence, this judgement.

5

Arguments

The thrust of the main contention advanced by Mr. Walgampaya, Counsel for and on behalf of the

Petitioner is that though the land had been acquired by the Respondents, and the entire acquisition

process took place in due course after publishing the Section 2 notice in 2000, in 2001 itself as

reflected in P6, the immediate possession of the land in suit had been taken on behalf of the

Government. However, since then, the said land has not been put to any use or it has not been

utilised for its intended public purpose for which it was acquired or any other public purpose; it

remains without been utilised, and no compensation has been paid thus far. Accordingly, Mr.

Walgampaya argued that all the ingredients stipulated in Section 39A of the Land Acquisition Act

have been satisfied by the Petitioner to obtain a divesture or direction to divest the said land to her

as the original owner thereof.

Further, it was argued for and on behalf of the Respondents, that State policy is not subject to

judicial review; therefore, this Application is liable to be dismissed.

Private land acquired

Before I come to consider the arguments, I wish to mention the following undisputed facts, as the

parties have placed their arguments based on these undisputed facts, as well as to avoid repetition

in the body of my judgement.

The Petitioner became the owner of a part of Millagahawatta, as depicted in the Plan marked as

P1 annexed to the Petition. The relevant portion is also depicted as Lot 1B of Plan No. 527A, and

the Petitioner became the owner thereof by virtue of the Deed marked as P2.

6

Thereafter, the predecessor of the 6th Respondent published a notice dated 15.11.2000 under

Section 2 of the LA Act, which is marked as P4 annexed to the Petition. It is also undisputed that

the predecessor of the 6th Respondent has taken over immediate possession of the land thereof in

terms of Section 38A proviso of the LA Act in respect of Lot Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4 as depicted in the

Plan marked as P5, and the relevant Gazette notification is annexed to the Petition as P6.

Subsequently, the Petitioner was also informed of the taking over of immediate possession by the

document marked as P7 annexed to the Petition. Thereafter, the Surveyor General had informed

the Petitioner, by letter marked as P8, to point out the boundaries for the purpose of preparing the

final plan required for the publication under Section 5. However, following the preliminary survey,

the Surveyor General prepared Plan P9, wherein Lot Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 were identified as lots

acquired from the Petitioner.

Thereafter, the Petitioner received a notice under Section 9, marked as P10 and dated 26.10.2009.

Consequently, an inquiry was conducted by the predecessor of the 6th Respondent in terms of

Section 10, as reflected by documents marked P11 and P12. By letter marked as P13, the Petitioner

was requested to participate in the said inquiry to claim compensation under the LA Act.

Subsequently, the Petitioner was informed that she had been awarded a sum of Rs. 872,000/- (Eight

Hundred and Seventy-Two Thousand Rupees) as compensation, by letter dated 31.05.2012,

marked P16. Thereafter, the Petitioner appealed to the Appeal Tribunal established under the Land

Acquisition Act; however, the said appeal was dismissed.

Nevertheless, so far, no compensation has been paid to date, and further, no steps have been taken

by any of the Respondents to utilize the land for the purpose for which it was acquired. Therefore,

the Petitioner pursued an application for a divestiture, by letters marked P20, P27(a) and P28. In

7

the meantime, the 6th Respondent, by letter marked P31, informed the Petitioner that if a proper

application was made, her application for divestiture would be considered.

However, since no further action was taken thereafter, the Petitioner has instituted the above-styled

Application before this Court seeking relief.

In light of the above undisputed facts, I now proceed to consider the arguments advanced by both

parties to determine whether divestiture is justifiable in terms of the law.

The Petitioner seeks a divesture on the basis that though the Section 2 notice for the said acquisition

had been issued and published as way back as in 2000, and thereafter in 2001, pending the formal

acquisition, the immediate possession of the land in suit was taken by the predecessor of the 1st

Respondent by the notice published under the Gazette marked and annexed to the Petition as P6;

in so far, the land had not been used for the purpose for which it was acquired. In addition to that,

no compensation has been paid to the Petitioner although it was decided to be paid.

The Petitioner seeks the said divesture in terms of Section 39A of the LA Act; therefore, I will

now consider it under each and every ground on whether the Petitioner is entitled to succeed her

claim for divesture.

No compensation paid

The said land had been acquired for the purpose of the expansion of the Meegoda Homagama

Town, and the setting up of a shopping complex. In that behalf, the predecessor of the 6th

Respondent had published a notice marked as P4. Thereafter, by P6, possession thereof has been

taken over immediately under Section 38A of the LA Act.

8

Subsequently, though compensation has been claimed by the Petitioner, no compensation has been

paid as reflected by the documents marked and annexed to the Petition. Though the compensation

was decided by the Acquisition Officer in terms of Section 17(1), the Petitioner has appealed

against the said compensation to the Land Acquisition Board of Review; the said appeal has also

been rejected. Accordingly, the Petitioner had other no option and thus, sought to invoke the

jurisdiction of this Court by this Application.

As such, it is my view that although the land has been acquired, so far, no compensation has been

paid to the Petitioner; therefore, the first ground on which the Petitioner seeks the divesture is

satisfied.

Purported public purpose

The second matter that should be considered is whether the land has been utilised for the public

purpose for which it has been acquired. As clearly indicated by the documents and conceded by

the Respondents, thought the land had been acquired for the above-mentioned public purposes, so

far it has not been utilised for that purpose or any other public purpose; it still lies in idle as the

public purpose for which it was acquired for appears to be abandoned. As such, the Petitioner has

made several applications to the relevant authorities, including the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd Respondents as

borne out by the documents marked as P11 to P15 and P20 to P27(a) and P28 for a divesture.

Therefore, I hold that the second ground for a divesture is also satisfied.

No improvements

In addition to that, the Petitioner has established that the land has not been utilised and no

improvement is effected, as reflected in P24(a) to P24(d), the photographs wherein the land is

9

depicted with shrubs and hedges. As such, the Petitioner has made the appeal P20 to the 2nd

Respondent for a divesture.

However, in response to the said request, one of the Assistant Secretaries of the Ministry of Lands

has recommended the same by the document dated 28.03.2023, which is not marked. In fact, the

Homagama Divisional Secretary (predecessor of the 6th Respondent) has written a letter dated

13.12.2022 to the Director of the 2nd Respondent, seeking his permission for a divesture; the said

letter is marked as P31 annexed to the Petition. Accordingly, it is very clear that the public purpose

for which the land was acquired is abandoned, which even the predecessor of the 6th Respondent

has identified and recommended a divesture and sought permission by P31. Thus, the said letter is

annexed to the Petition along with the counter affidavits.

As such, it is my view that the Petitioner has satisfied all the relevant three ingredients, and

therefore, is entitled to a divesture.

In the circumstances, I wish to rely on the following dictum of Justice Mark Fernando’s judgement

in De Silva v. Atukorale, Minister of Lands, Irrigation and Mahaweli Development and Another1

to support the reasoning above, as the circumstances in the said case are very similar to the

circumstances in the present case;

“The Act contemplates a continuing state of things; it is sufficient if the lack of justification

appears at any subsequent point of time; this is clear from paragraph (b) of section 39A(2):

if the land has not been used for a public purpose after possession has been taken, there is

1 [1993] 1 Sri L.R. 283

10

then an insufficiency of justification; and the greater the lapse of time, the less the

justification for the acquisition.”2

It was also asserted in the Petition, as well as raised in the Arguments, that if the land had remained

with the Petitioner, she would have cultivated it and earned the harvest since it is arable land. Since

immediate possession was taken in 2001, she has lost all that. Alternatively, she could have used

it for commercial purposes or sold it for her benefit.

All those alternative arguments have not been countered by the Respondents or even challenged.

Therefore, it is my view that the economic rights that the Petitioner could have enjoyed were

deprived by the acquisition and immediate possession of the land; thus, such economic loss should

be considered in view of the following dictum of Justice Somawansa in the case of Mahinda

Katugaha v. Minister of Lands and Land Development and Others3;

“It is my considered view that before the 5th respondent leased the appellant's lands to the

4th respondent for a purported private hospital and resort project which is a profit making

venture of a commercial nature the 5th respondent should have offered the appellant's land

to the appellant himself to develop the land for the public purpose, for development of

public utilities. In fact the appellant had submitted an affidavit with his counter objections

in the Court of Appeal wherein he and several persons who claimed to be owners of the

land acquired and leased to the 4th respondent had stated that they can develop the land

for a public purpose and that they have the money to do so. Though counsel for the 4th

respondent contends that this proposal is unacceptable on the face of it as no mention is

2 De Silva v. Atukorale, Minister of Lands, Irrigation and Mahaweli Development and Another [1993] 1 Sri L.R. 292 3 Mahinda Katugaha v. Minister of Lands and Land Development and Others [2008] 1 SLR 285

11

made of what the project is or how the financing is to be had, it appears to me that it would

have been just and fair if the appellant was given the opportunity to place before the 5th

respondent the proposal for development of public utility before leasing out the appellant's

land to a profit-making private venture of a commercial nature.”

However, in this case, I cannot award damages as it is not in issue. Still, if the Petitioner desires to

do so, she can assert her rights in the correct Court.

State policy

Further, the learned State Counsel advanced an argument that State policy is not subject to judicial

review. It must always be remembered that State policy is always embodied in an Act of Parliament,

which is an accepted norm in a constitutional democracy, and State policy so reflected is jealously

enshrined in Section 39A. If the State policy is to be different, the government of the time should

change it, because they are empowered to do so; however, for that purpose, they must follow the

procedure provided by law. In this scenario, neither the State nor the government has changed the

policy reflected in Section 39A.

In addition to that, I must hold that the government is not the State; the government is only a part

of the State4. The concept of the State is a broader one, and State policies are mainly enshrined in

the Constitution. If, in the name of State policy, any form of government becomes destructive of

what is enshrined in the Constitution, it is the right of the people themselves to change the

government, as declared in the Declaration of Independence of America on the 4th of July 1776.

4 Laura S. Jensen (2008). Government, the State, and Governance. Polity, 40(3), 379-385; Ginsburg, T. (2017), ‘Written constitutions and the administrative state: On the constitutional character of administrative law’ in Susan Rose-Ackerman, Peter L. Lindseth, and Blake Emerson (eds), Compartive Administrative Law (Edward Elgar Publishing 2017)

12

Based on those fundamental principles, constitutional democracies adopt and promulgate their

Constitutions as the grundnorm of the State5.

Therefore, policies enshrined therein, and other general norms such as the provisions of the Land

Acquisition Act, including divestiture, are only hanging from the grundnorm, deriving their

sustaining power from it. If the grundnorm collapses, the entire system will collapse.

Therefore, it must always be remembered that governments are instituted among men to secure the

ends of life, liberty, and pursuit of happiness, which include the right to property that the members

of the State enjoy, and which is clearly recognized under State policy. Accordingly, the rights of

the ordinary members of society cannot be trampled upon by the iron boots of any government in

the name of State policy. As such, the argument advanced is baseless and has been made without

an understanding of first principles.

Conclusion

Based on the reasons adumbrated above, I grant reliefs as prayed for in prayers (b) and (c) of the

Petition, and further order Rs. 105,000/- (One Hundred and Five Thousand Rupees) as cost of

litigation payable by the Respondents jointly and severally to the Petitioner.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

5 R.W.M. Dias (1985), Jurisprudence (5th Edition, Butterworth & Co Publishers Ltd 1985), Chapter 17 “The Pure Theory”, 358-373.