Page 1 of 8

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under and in terms of section 331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 as amended.

The Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. Complainant

Court of Appeal Case No.: CA HCC 0306-307/19 Vs. High Court of Kurunegala Case No.: HC 03/2015

1. Dhammika Prasanna Wijesinghe 2. Anura Jayathissa Wijesinghe

Accused AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Dhammika Prasanna Wijesinghe,

No.69, 5/B,420, Helamba Wewa, Thalawa. 2. Anura Jayathissa Wijesinghe,

No.110/07, Suhada Mawatha, Maraluwewa, Kurunegala.

Page 2 of 8

(Presently at the Bogambara Prison, Dumbara, Pallekalle) Accused-Appellant Vs.

Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. Complainant-Respondent

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran, J. Amal Ranaraja, J.

Counsel: Darshana Kuruppu with Tharushi Gamage and Anjana

Adikaramge for the Accused-Appellant.

Suharshi Herath, D.S.G. for the Complainant-Respondent. Argued on: 08.09.2025 Judgment on: 07.10.2025

Page 3 of 8

JUDGMENT

AMAL RANARAJA, J.

1. The Accused-Appellants (hereinafter referred to as the “Appellant”) have been

indicted in the High Court of Kurunegala in High Court case number HC

03/2015.

2. The charges in the indictment are as follows;

Charge 01

That on or about September 19, 2005, at Kurunegala, within the

jurisdiction of this Court, the accused did agree to commit or abet or

act together with a common purpose for, or, in committing or abetting

an offence to wit, the murder of one Rathnayake Mudiyanselage

Anusha Hemanthi Rathnamali Rathnayake and thereby committed

the offence of conspiracy, in consequence of which conspiracy the

said offence of murder was committed, and thereby committed an

offence punishable under section 296 of the Penal Code read with

section 113B and 102 of the Penal Code.

Charge 02

That on the same date, place, time and in the same course of

transaction as in the first charge, the accused did commit the offence

of murder by causing the death of one Rathnayake Mudiyanselage

Anusha Hemanthi Rathnamali Rathnayake and thereby committed an

offence punishable under section 296 read with section 32 of the

Penal Code.

Page 4 of 8

3. At the conclusion of the trial, the learned High Court Judge has convicted

the appellant of the charges and sentenced them to death.

4. Aggrieved by the conviction, the disputed judgment and the sentencing

order, the appellants have preferred the instant appeal to this Court.

Case of the prosecution

5. PW01 has served as the Manager, while the deceased as a clerk, at the same

fuel station located in Gokarella, on the Kurunegala-Dambulla road. On

September 19, 2005, PW01 has accompanied the deceased to a bank in the

city of Kurunegala, where the latter was to deposit the “collection” of the fuel

station up until such time.

6. Prior to completing the deposit, the deceased has informed PW01 that she

planned to visit a relative nearby and would return to the fuel station

afterward. However, she has not returned as promised.

7. The management of the fuel station has later informed the deceased’s family

about her absence. The father of the deceased, along with PW20 a sibling have

attempted to reach the deceased by phone. Although, the deceased had

requested her father to pick her up from the bank, he has been unable to

locate her there.

8. On September 20, 2005, following the information received from a third party,

the lifeless body of the deceased has been discovered from the area, the fuel

station where she has been employed was situated.

Page 5 of 8

Case of the Appellant

9. The appellants have consistently maintained their innocence, firmly denying

any involvement in the incident that led to the death of the deceased.

Ground of Appeal

10. When the matter was taken up for argument, the learned Counsel for the

appellant urged the following ground of appeal;

i) That the appellants were denied the right to a fair trial

guaranteed to them under Article 13(3) of the Constitution.

A. The learned Trial Judge has failed to call the defence and to

explain the rights of the accused-appellants after the

conclusion of the prosecution’s case.

B. The Counsel assigned to the 1st accused-appellant has not

been afforded sufficient time for the preparation of the

defence case.

11. Section 200(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 provides

as follows;

“(1) When the case for the prosecution is closed, if the Judge wholly

discredits the evidence on the part of the prosecution or is of opinion

that such evidence fails to establish the commission of the offence

charged against the accused in the indictment or of any offence of

which he might be convicted on such indictment, he shall record verdict

of acquittal; if, however the Judge considers that there are grounds for

proceeding with the trial he shall call upon the accused for his

defence.”

Page 6 of 8

12. On July 25, 2019, the prosecution’s case has been closed. Subsequently, the

case has been scheduled for further trial to allow the appellants to present

their defence.

“පැමිණිල්ලල් නඩුව අවසන්. විත්තිය විභාග 2019.07.29”

13. The learned High Court Judge has therefore not formally called upon the

appellants to present their defence.

14. This procedural discrepancy, it is contended, has deprived the appellants of

their right to a fair trial.

15. The learned Counsel for the appellant’s to support his contention has directed

the Court’s attention to the following judgments.

In Mohamed Ali Sameed Smail vs. The Attorney General CA/160/2015 decided

on October 27, 2017, Thurairaja, J. has stated;

“We should be mindful when a person is charged with an offence, he is

on one side and the all mighty the state is on the other side. That is why

in many countries in world especially the countries which follow

Common Law several safe guards are provided, such as legal aid and

judicial review to the accused to uphold the Rule of Law which is very

vital in protecting the rights of any citizen of a nation. When one

considers law with criminal sanctions it can be observed that the law is

with absolute certainty and more favourable towards the accused.

Further, the Human Resource Developments of public servants including

Police, Prosecution, Court staffs and the Judiciary is provided for not

only serving the victim but also for the main objective of protecting the

rights of the accused…Since the 1st ground of appeal is held in favour of

the accused the 2nd ground of appeal may not be decided, but for

academic purposes I hold that non-awarding of defence as per section

200(1) of the CCPA for the reason stated above also results vacation of

trial. On these circumstances this Court will order a retrial.”

Page 7 of 8

Further in D.K.Lionel vs. The Republic of Sri Lanka 79 NLR 553, Tennekoon,

C.J. has stated,

“the duty of the Judge to inform the “accused” that he is entitled to

give evidence must be addressed to the accused himself and the

decision whether or not the accused is to give evidence must be that of

the accused himself.”

16. On July 29, 2019, when the case was resumed for further trial, the Counsel

representing the first appellant in the High Court has withdrawn from the

proceedings. Consequently, a new Counsel has been assigned to the first

appellant and the trial continued on the same day.

17. However, the assigned Counsel has not been given adequate time to prepare

for the case, by the trial being adjourned to another day. As a result, the

assigned Counsel has been required to conduct the case of the first appellant

without proper preparation. This situation, it is argued by the learned Counsel

for the appellants has compromised the fairness of the trial of his client.

In Murugaiya Sharmila Devi vs. Hon. Attorney General CA 262/09, decided on

October 03, 2012, Rohini Marasinghe, J. has stated,

“The Counsel for the Appellant contends that the appellant had been

denied a fair trial. In this case as borne out by the case record, the

assigned counsel of the appellant had been absent at the time the case

was taken up for hearing. The Trial Judge had very rightly assigned

another counsel. Having assigned a counsel, the Trial Judge had

wrongly proceeded to hear the case on the same day at the same time.”

18. The learned Deputy Solicitor General appearing on behalf of the respondents

has acknowledged that the procedural discrepancies mentioned earlier has

deprived the appellants of their right to a fair trial in the High Court.

19. The offences with which the appellants have been charged are of a serious and

grave nature. Acquitting the appellants solely on the basis of procedural

Page 8 of 8

discrepancies from the trial Court would not be justifiable or in accordance

with the principles of justice. Therefore, this court holds the view that this

case warrants a retrial.

20. In light of the seriousness of the charges, it is imperative that justice is not

only done but also seen to be done. While procedural fairness is essential in

any judicial process, the gravity of the offences involved necessitates a

thorough examination of the evidence presented. A re-trial in this context,

presents an opportunity to reassess the circumstances of the case and to

make a fair determination based on the merits of the evidence.

This Court also believes that a retrial will provide the appellants with a chance

to defend themselves properly against the charges.

21. In those circumstances, I am inclined to set aside the conviction and the

disputed judgment, together with the sentencing order and order a retrial.

Retrial ordered.

I make no order regarding costs.

22. The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment together with the

original case record to the High Court of Kurunegala for compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

B. SASI MAHENDRAN, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal