IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

W.M. Srimathi Malkanthi

Madurapperuma,

Huladduwa,

Getahetta.

1st and 2A Plaintiff-Respondent-

Appellant

CASE NO: CALA/459/2006

DC AVISSAWELLA CASE NO: 421/P

Vs.

W.M. Dammadinna Kumari

Wijesundara,

Somasiri Walawwa,

Illukpitiya,

Getahetta.

3A Defendant-Petitioner-

Respondent

and Several Others

Respondents

2

Before: A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Rohan Sahabandu, P.C., with Hasitha

Amarasinghe for the Plaintiff-Appellant.

M.U.M. Ali Sabry, P.C., with Sanjeewa

Dasanayake for the 3A Defendant-

Respondent.

Argued on: 20.09.2019

Decided on: 03.10.2019

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff filed this appeal with leave obtained against the

order of the learned District Judge of Avissawella dated

03.11.2006 whereby, upon the application of the 3A defendant,

the Judgment and the Interlocutory Decree entered by his

predecessor in 2002 was set aside and trial de novo was ordered

on the basis that the case has been taken up for trial without

due notice to the new registered Attorney of the 3rd defendant.

This the learned District Judge did relying on the Judgment of

the Court of Appeal in Umma v. Zubair.1

It is the submission of the learned Presidents Counsel for the

plaintiff that, in a partition case, once the Interlocutory Decree is

entered, the District Court can set it aside, upon an application

by a party to the case, only if that party can satisfy the

1 [2002] 3 Sri LR 169

3

requirements of section 48(4) of the Partition Law, No. 21 of

1977, as amended; and as the 3A defendant admittedly did not

and could not make the application under that section, the

District Court had no jurisdiction to do it; and that could only

have been done by this Court by way of revision. The learned

Presidents Counsel further states that Umma v. Zubair has been

wrongly decided and therefore need not be followed.

In Umma v. Zubair, the District Judge set aside the Interlocutory

Decree entered by his predecessor and allowed a new party to

file the statement of claim on the basis that non-compliance

with sections 12 and 14 of the Partition Law renders the entire

proceedings void ab initio. On appeal to this Court, this order of

the District Judge has been affirmed by Udalagama J. (with the

concurrence of Nanayakkara J.) on the following reasons.

It is submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner citing

Somawathie v. Madawala [1983] 2 Sri LR 15 that the learned

District Judge had no power to allow intervention after the entry

of the interlocutory decree and further that the petitioner-

respondent could have his remedy by way of revision or restitutio

in integrum. Although the above submission is not without merit I

am inclined to the view that even if this application is dismissed

the petitioner-respondent would not be precluded from moving in

revision and would only result in further delay in concluding this

matter before the original court.2

The finality of the interlocutory decree as contemplated in section

48(3) of the Partition Act in my view could not prevent or preclude

2 at 171

4

a District Judge even to act under inherent powers to make right

a miscarriage of justice occasioned.3

I would further hold that section 48(4) of the Partition Act No. 21

of 1977 could not bar a court from holding that in the event

summons had not been even issued in an action for partition

from coming to a finding that such non-issue was improper or

that the court in such instance had no jurisdiction to proceed.

Besides, section 48(4) referred to above could not suppress the

rights of parties to claim their due rights in partition actions

which are decrees in rem.4 (emphasis mine)

To decide whether the argument of the learned Presidents

Counsel for the plaintiff is entitled to succeed, it is necessary to

understand the relevant statutory provisions of the Partition

Law, which govern the powers of the District Judge to set aside

Partition Judgments delivered by himself.

Section 48(1) of the Partition Law gives final and conclusive

effect to the Interlocutory and Final Decree of Partition subject

to: (a) sub section (5) of that section; (b) the decision on any

appeal which may be preferred and; (c) subject to sub section (4)

of that section, notwithstanding any omission or defect of

procedure, which includes failure to serve summons, failure to

make substitutions upon death of parties, and failure to make

all persons necessary as parties to the partition action.

Let me reproduce section 48(1) to better understand this unique

feature of this special piece of legislation.

3 ibid 4 at 171-172

5

48(1) Save as provided in subsection (5) of this section, the

interlocutory decree entered under section 26 and the final

decree of partition entered under section 36 shall, subject to the

decision on any appeal which may be preferred therefrom, and in

the case of an interlocutory decree, subject also to the provisions

of subsection (4) of this section, be good and sufficient evidence

of the title of any person as to any right, share or interest

awarded therein to him and be final and conclusive for all

purposes against all persons whomsoever, whatever right, title or

interest they have, or claim to have, to or in the land to which

such decree relates and notwithstanding any omission or defect

of procedure or in the proof of title adduced before the court or the

fact that all persons concerned are not parties to the partition

action; and the right, share or interest awarded by any such

decree shall be free from all encumbrances whatsoever other

than those specified in that decree.

In this subsection omission or defect of procedure shall include

an omission or failure-

(a) to serve summons on any party; or

(b) to substitute the heirs or legal representatives of a party

who dies pending the action or to appoint a person to

represent the estate of the deceased party for the

purposes of the action; or

(c) to appoint a guardian ad litem of a party who is a minor or

a person of unsound mind.

In this subsection and in the next subsection encumbrance

means any mortgage, lease, usufruct, servitude, life interest,

trust, or any interest whatsoever howsoever arising except a

constructive or charitable trust, a lease at will or for a period not

exceeding one month.

6

(2) Where in pursuance of the interlocutory decree a land or any

lot thereof is sold, the certificate of sale entered in favour of the

purchaser shall be conclusive evidence of the purchaser's title to

the land or lot as at the date of the confirmation of sale, free from

all encumbrances whatsoever except any servitude which is

expressly specified in such interlocutory decree and a lease at

will or for a period not exceeding one month.

(3) The interlocutory decree and the final decree of partition

entered in a partition action shall have the final and conclusive

effect declared by subsection (1) of this section notwithstanding

the provisions of section 44 of the Evidence Ordinance, and

accordingly such provisions shall not apply to such decrees.

Although section 48(1) in peremptory terms states that the

Interlocutory Decree and Final Decree of Partition entered in a

partition action shall have the final and conclusive effect despite

inherent shortcomings, section 48(4) allows a party to the action

who (a) has not been served with summons or (b) being a minor

or a person of unsound mind and has not been duly represented

by a guardian ad litem or (c) being a party who has duly filed his

statement of claim and registered his address fails to appear at

the trial, to make an application to the District Court for special

leave within the stipulated period stated therein to establish his

right, title or interest in respect of the land notwithstanding the

Interlocutory Decree had already been entered.

Section 48(4) reads as follows:

48(4)(a) Whenever a party to a partition action-

(i) has not been served with summons or

7

(ii) being a minor or a person of unsound mind, has not been

duly represented by a guardian ad litem, or

(iv) being a party who has duly filed his statement of claim

and registered his address, fails to appear at the trial,

and in consequence thereof the right, title or interest of such

party to or in the land which forms the subject-matter of the

interlocutory decree entered in such action has been extinguished

or such party has been otherwise prejudiced by the interlocutory

decree, such party or where such party is a minor or a person of

unsound mind, a person appointed as guardian ad litem of such

party may, on or before the date fixed for the consideration of the

scheme of partition under section 35 or at any time not later than

thirty days after the return of the person responsible for the sale

under section 42 is received by court, apply to the court for

special leave to establish the right, title or interest of such party

to or in the said land notwithstanding the interlocutory decree

already entered.

(b) The aforesaid application shall be by petition, supported by

an affidavit verifying the facts, which shall conform to the

provisions of paragraph (a) of subsection (1) of section 19 and

shall specify to what extent and in what manner the applicant

seeks to have the interlocutory decree amended, modified or set

aside and the parties affected thereby.

(c) If upon inquiry into such application, after prior notice to the

parties to the action deriving any interest under the interlocutory

decree, the court is satisfied-

(i) that the party affected had no notice whatsoever of the

said partition action prior to the date of the interlocutory

decree or having duly filed his statement of claim and

8

registered his address, failed to appear at the trial owing

to accident, misfortune or other unavoidable cause, and

(ii) that such party had a prima facie right, title or interest

to or in the said land, and

(iii) that such right, title or interest has been extinguished

or such party has been otherwise prejudicially affected by

the said interlocutory decree,

the court shall upon such terms and conditions as the court in its

discretion may impose, which may include an order for payment

of costs as well as an order for security for costs, grant special

leave to the applicant.

(d) Where the court grants special leave as hereinbefore provided

the court shall forthwith settle in the form of issues the questions

of fact and law arising from the pleadings and any further

pleadings which are relevant to the claim set up in the petition

only, and the court shall appoint a date for the trial and

determination of the issues.

The applicant, unless the court otherwise orders, shall cause

notice of such date to be given to all parties whose rights under

the interlocutory decree are likely to be affected or to their

registered attorney in such manner as the court shall specify.

The court shall thereafter proceed to hear and determine the

matters in issue in accordance with the procedure applicable to

the trial of a partition action.

(e) Where the court determines any matter in issue in favour of

the applicant, the court shall in accordance with its findings

amend or modify the interlocutory decree to such extent and in

such manner only as shall be necessary to give to the successful

party and to no other party or person whomsoever, the right, title

or interest to which such party is entitled, or in the event of the

9

applicant being found entitled to the entirety of the said land

forming the subject-matter of the interlocutory decree, the court

shall set aside the interlocutory decree and dismiss the action.

Section 48(5) also gives power to the District Court to set aside

the Interlocutory and Final Decrees of Partition on the ground of

want of jurisdiction. It reads as follows:

48(5) The interlocutory decree or the final decree of partition

entered in a partition action shall not have the final and

conclusive effect given to it by subsection (1) of this section as

against a person who, not having been a party to the partition

action, claims any such right, title or interest to or in the land or

any portion of the land to which the decree relates as is not

directly or remotely derived from the decree, if, but only if, he

proves that the decree has been entered by a court without

competent jurisdiction.

However, in terms of section 48(3), the powers of the Court of

Appeal to set aside the Interlocutory and Final Decrees by way of

revision and/or restitutio in integrum to avert miscarriage of

justice when proceedings were tainted with fundamental vice

have been expressly preserved.

48(3) The powers of the Supreme Court by way of revision and

restitution in integrum shall not be affected by the provisions of

this subsection.5

5 Administration of Justice Law, No. 44 of 1973 abolished the Court of Appeal and made the Supreme Court the only superior court of record which could exercise jurisdiction by way of appeal, revision and restitutio in integrum. Thereafter by 1978 Constitution, Court of Appeal was again created, and conferred appellate, revisionary and restitutio in integrum jurisdiction on it, leaving the Supreme Court the highest and final superior court of record. Therefore, this sub section drafted in 1977 need to be amended to replace Supreme Court with Court of Appeal.

10

In the celebrated case of Somawathie v. Madawala6 a Five Judge

Bench of the Supreme Court (Sharvananda J. (later C.J.),

Wanasundara J., Wimalaratne J., and Ratwatte J., and Soza J.)

held that:

When there is no proper compliance with Section 12(1) of the

Partition Law in the matter of the declaration stipulated to be filed

under that section and no notice has been served on the claimants

before the Surveyor as required by section 22(1)(a) of the Act then

the Appeal Court can intervene by way of revision, to prevent a

miscarriage of justice.

Although section 48 invests interlocutory and final decrees entered

under the Partition Act with finality the revisionary powers of the

Appeal Court are left unaffected. The position is the same under

the Partition Law.

The powers of revision and restitutio in integrum of the Appeal

Court have survived all the legislation that has been enacted up to

date.

Let me now understand the reasoning of Udalagama J. in Umma

v. Zubair in the backdrop of the said express provisions of the

Partition Law to see whether it represents the correct position of

the Law.

In the first place, in Umma v. Zubair, the petitioner who made

the application before the District Court to vacate the

Interlocutory Decree was not a party to the case. Section 48(4),

under which the application appears to have been made to the

District Court, could be invoked only by a party to the case. That

is the threshold requirement to make the application under that 6 [1983] 2 Sri LR 15

11

section. Hence the petitioner in Umma v. Zubair could not have

made the application under section 48(4). Therefore, with all

due respect, there is a fundamental error, in my view, in that

Judgment.

In Somawathie v. Madawala, Soza J. who wrote the illuminating

Judgment on behalf of the Supreme Court left no room for

conjectures on the subject and stated without mincing words:

[T]he District Judge had no power to allow the intervention after

the entry of interlocutory decree. This can be done only by a

superior Court acting in revision.7

As I quoted above, the counsel for the plaintiff in Umma v. Zubair

drew the attention of Udalagama J. to the Judgment of

Somawathie v. Madawala to emphasize that the District Judge

had no jurisdiction to vacate his own Judgment in the

circumstances of that case. Udalagama J. acknowledged that

position of law, but stated that, if the order of the District Court

is set aside due to want of jurisdiction on the part of the District

Court, the same party could successfully come before this Court

by way of revision, and therefore the order of the District Court

shall be allowed to stand to avert further delay.8 With respect,

that reasoning is simply unacceptable on first principles. That

amounts to conferring parallel revisionary jurisdiction on the

District Court in partition cases to revise its own Judgments to

save time as the same can be done by the Court of Appeal. I 7 At page 32 8 If I may repeat, Udalagama J. at page 171 stated: Although the above submission is not without merit I am inclined to the view that even if this application is dismissed the petitioner-respondent would not be precluded from moving in revision and would only result in further delay in concluding this matter before the original court.

12

need hardly emphasize the chaotic situation which would arise

in terms of jurisdiction and hierarchy of courts, if it is permitted.

Furthermore, such a finding presupposes that, once come before

the Court of Appeal by way of revision setting aside the

Judgment of the District Court is automatic or perfunctory,

which is not correct. The Appellate Court will intervene, only if

there is a fundamental vice in the procedure, which has caused

grave positive miscarriage of justice and not otherwise.9

When the legislature with meticulous scrutiny has laid down the

procedure, or rather the limited circumstances upon which the

District Court can set aside an Interlocutory Decree entered by

itself, there is no room for the District Court to go beyond those

parameters and grant reliefs as Udalagama J. has stated, under

inherent powers. Such an attitude would unmistakably render

section 48 absolutely nugatory.

Jayaratne v. Premadasa10 is another leading case decided after

Somawathie v. Madawala and Umma v. Zubair on this point. In

Jayaratnes case, the original plaintiff filed an action to partition

a land of 30 acres. The surveyor who did the preliminary survey

produced a plan for more than 71 acres. Without a contest the

Judgment was delivered to partition the 71-acre land and

Interlocutory Decree was entered. Thereafter three persons who

were not parties to the action applied to set aside the Judgment

or alternatively to confine the corpus to 30 acres. The District

Judge allowed this application, and the Court of Appeal justified

9 Eg. Koralage v. Marikkar Mohomad [1988] 2 NLR 299, Perera v. Adline [2000] 3 Sri LR 93, Navaratne Manike v. Padmasena [2010] 2 Sri LR 165 10 [2004] 1 Sri LR 340

13

it by reference to the inherent powers of the District Court in

terms of section 839 of the Civil Procedure Code (probably

following Umma v. Zubair). In appeal to the Supreme Court

therefrom, the Supreme Court set aside the order of the District

Court as well as the Judgment of this Court which affirmed it,

on the basis that the District Court had no jurisdiction to vary

the Judgment. Weerasuriya J. on behalf of the Supreme Court

(with S.N. Silva C.J. and Ismail J. agreeing) stated11:

It is significant that section 48(1) of the Partition Law gives

final and conclusive effect to the interlocutory decree subject to the

decision on any appeal which may be preferred therefrom and sub

section (4) as referred to earlier. Having regard to the stringent

provisions of section 48 of the Partition Law which had as their

object the finality of the interlocutory decree it is obvious that

learned District Judge had acted in blatant disregard of the

provisions of section 48.

On a consideration of the above material it would be manifest that

District Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the application of the

petitioner-respondent-respondents to seek the relief they prayed

for and the application was misconceived. The Court of Appeal has

taken the erroneous view that notwithstanding the provisions of

section 48, learned District Judge was justified in restricting the

corpus to 30 acres using the inherent powers of Court in terms

of section 839 of the Civil Procedure Code. For the foregoing

reasons I hold that the Court of Appeal has erred in affirming the

order of the District Judge which was patently outside his

jurisdiction. Therefore, I set aside the order of the District Judge

11 At page 344

14

dated 04.11.1998 and the order of the Court of Appeal dated

07.03.2002.

When summons has not been issued, Udalagama J. states,

section 48(4) could not bar the District Court from holding that

such non-issue was improper or the Court in such instances

had no jurisdiction to proceed.

It is noteworthy that there is a distinction between non-service

of summons to a party to the case and failure to make a person

a party to the case. Service of summons does not arise in the

latter instance as summons is issued only on a party to the

case. The Partition Law has provided for both those

contingencies.

Under section 48(4)(a)(i), when summons has not been served on

a party, that party can seek special leave within the stipulated

time to establish the right, title or interest of such party to or in

the land to be partitioned notwithstanding the Interlocutory

Decree had already been entered. But, as I have already stated,

the person who applied the District Judge to set aside the

Interlocutory Decree in Umma v. Subir was not a party. Nor did

he challenge the Interlocutory Decree under section 48(5) on

lack of jurisdiction.

Once the Interlocutory Decree is entered, the District Court has

no jurisdiction to set it aside otherwise than in the limited

circumstances stipulated in section 48(4) and (5) of the Partition

Law. The District Court cannot set aside Interlocutory Decrees

by way of revision or restitutio in integrum or by invoking

inherent powers of the Court to avert miscarriage of justice or to

15

remove fundamental vice in the proceedings or in the name of

due administration of justice or any other ground. That can

only be done by a Superior Court.

For the aforesaid reasons, with all due respect, I take the view

that, Umma v. Zubair does not represent correct position of the

law in terms of the powers of the District Judges to set aside

their own Judgments entered in partition actions, and therefore

need not be followed.

I must also make the following point clear for the benefit of the

District Judges as there is an apparent confusion on that point.

It may be noted that section 48 speaks of only finality and

conclusiveness of Interlocutory Decrees and Final Decrees of

Partition, and not of Judgments. This gives the impression that

finality and conclusiveness is attached only to the Interlocutory

and Final Decrees, and therefore, in between delivery of the

Judgment and entering the Interlocutory Decree, the District

Court can set aside the Judgment and add parties and

commence trial de novo. It is not so. The entering of the Decree

is a purely ministerial act and the Interlocutory Decree once

entered relates back to the date of Judgment.12 In short, section

48 becomes applicable from the date of the Judgment.

The District Court can add parties, in terms of section 69 of the

Partition Law, only until the Judgment is delivered and not after

it.

12 Petisingho v. Ratnaweera (1959) 62 NLR 572, Ariyaratne v. Lapie (1973) 76 NLR 221, Dissanayake v. Elisinahamy [1978-79] 2 Sri LR 118, Koralage v. Marikkar Mohomed [1988] 2 Sri LR 299

16

69(1) The court may at any time before the judgment is delivered

in a partition action add as a party to the action, on such terms as

to payment or prepayment of costs as the court may order-

(a) any person who, in the opinion of the court, should be,

or should have been, made a party to the action, after

issuing to such person, a notice, substantially in the Form

set out in the Second Schedule to this Law, requiring him

to make an application to be added as a party to the

action on or before the date specified in the notice, and

upon such person making such an application or;

(b) any person who, claiming an interest in the land,

applies to be added as a party to the action.

Let me now consider the present appeal. The 3A defendant

made the application to the District Court to vacate the

Interlocutory Decree by way of statement of objections filed

against the Final Partition Plan.13 There is no dispute that 3A

defendant did not and could not make the application under

section 48(4) or (5) of the Partition Law.

The learned Presidents Counsel for the 3A defendant argues

that although it is not expressly stated in the impugned order,

what the learned District Judge has done is to purge default of

the 3rd defendant as the trial has proceeded without due notice

to the 3rd defendant or his new registered Attorney as seen from

Journal Entry No. 94 of the District Court case record where

notice had been served on the registered Attorney whose proxy,

as seen from Journal Entry No. 93, had been revoked. The

13 Vide the statement of objections and the corresponding affidavit dated 06.12.2005 at pages 84-97 of the brief, and the JE No. 118 at page 33-34 of the brief.

17

learned Presidents Counsel citing De Fonseka v.

Dharmawardena14 submits that such inquiries into purging

default are conducted by invoking inherent powers of the Court.

The learned Presidents Counsel for the 3A defendant also

submits that, the Judgment entered under such circumstances

can also be set aside by the District Court itself as one entered

per incuriam. In this regard learned Presidents Counsel cites

Jeyaraj Fernandopulle v. Premachandra15 which reiterated the

well-established principle that The Court has inherent powers to

correct decisions made per incuriam.

I find it difficult to bring myself to accept that line of argument

as this is a partition case. In both those instances, according to

the learned Presidents Counsel himself, Court sets aside the

Judgment by invoking inherent powers of the Court, which the

Supreme Court, as I have already discussed, frowned upon or

held inapplicable in partition actions once the Interlocutory

Decree is entered, unless the application falls under section

48(4) or (5) of the Partition Law.

I accept the argument of the learned Presidents Counsel for the

plaintiff that partition actions are sui generis and unique.

It is significant to note that, notwithstanding the Civil Procedure

Code has made provisions in respect of Decrees, in Partition

Law, special provisions have been enacted from sections 48 to

53 in relation to Decrees under the heading SPECIAL

PROVISIONS RELATING TO DECREES predominantly in order

14 [1994] 3 Sri LR 49 15 [1996] 1 Sri LR 70

18

to invest the Interlocutory and Final Decrees of Partition with

finality as far as possible.

In the Partition Law how a party in default can purge default has

been set out. Hence the default proceedings spelt out in the

Civil Procedure Code are inapplicable.

De Fonseka v. Dharmawardena (supra) was a rent and ejectment

case where the defendant made an application to vacate the ex

parte Judgment in terms of section 86(2) of the Civil Procedure

Code. What was challenged in that case before the Court of

Appeal was not the jurisdiction of the District Court, but the

procedure adopted by the learned District Judge in conducting

the inquiry. It is in that context the Court referred to invocation

of inherent powers in that case.

Section 79 of the Partition Law which enables any casus omissus

to be governed by the Civil Procedure Code states that procedure

laid down in the Civil Procedure Code is applicable only if

procedure has not been set out in the Partition Law. It reads as

follows:

In any matter or question of procedure not provided for in this

Law, the procedure laid down in the Civil Procedure Code in a like

matter or question shall be followed by the court, if such procedure

is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Law.

Let me now summarize the law regarding default proceedings in

Partition Law.

19

Before the Judgment is delivered, a party in default can make an

application to the District Court to participate in the trial. This

is provided for in section 25(2) and (3) of the Partition Law.

25(2) If a defendant shall fail to file a statement of claim on the

due date the trial may proceed ex parte as against such party in

default, who shall not be entitled, without the leave of court, to

raise any contest or dispute the claim of any other party to the

action at the trial.

25(3) The court may permit a party in default to participate in the

trial after notice to the other parties to the action affected by the

claim or dispute set up or raised by such party in default, on

being satisfied of the bona fides of such claim or dispute, and

upon such terms as to costs and filing of a statement of claim or

otherwise as the court shall deem fit.

Before the Judgment is delivered, a non-party can also make an

application to the District Court to add him as a party in order

to participate in the trial. This is provided for in section 69 of

the Partition Law.

After the Judgment is delivered, a party can make an application

to the District Court to set aside the Judgment and the

Interlocutory Decree entered thereon only upon the limited

grounds and the circumstances set out in section 48(4) of the

Partition Law, which I have adverted to earlier.

After the delivery of the Judgment, a non-party can make an

application to the District Court to set aside the

Judgement/Interlocutory Decree/Final Decree under section

20

48(5) only on the ground that the Decree has been entered by a

Court without competent jurisdiction.

On no other ground can a party or a non-party to the action

make an application to the District Court to set aside the

Judgment. The District Judge cannot nullify the express

provisions of the Partition Law designed to give finality to the

Decrees in partition actions by what is termed as invoking

inherent jurisdiction of the Court.

After the Judgment, those who do not come under section 48 are

not without a remedy. They shall seek relief from the Court of

Appeal by way of revision or restitutio in integrum as the case

may be. They can also file an action for damages under section

49 of the Partition Law.

The only matter now left for consideration is whether this Court

can act in revision to see whether the Judgment and the

Interlocutory Decree entered by the District Court ought to be

set aside as the Supreme Court did in Jayaratne v. Premadasa

(supra). That is not possible in the circumstances of this case as

the present 3A defendant has earlier come before this Court by

way of revision (CA/RV/1575/2005) seeking to set aside the

same Interlocutory Decree of the District Court, and this Court,

after giving a hearing to the 3A defendant, has refused to issue

notice and dismissed the application by order dated

31.09.2005.16

16 Vide the certified copy of the petition in that case found marked Z in the brief and the Court of Appeal order of Wimalachandra J. (with Somawansa J. agreeing) at page 180 of the brief.

21

In the present case what really has happened is after the

revision application of the 3A defendant seeking to set aside the

Interlocutory Decree was dismissed by this Court, 3A defendant,

without making any reference to the said Court of Appeal

application, has made the same application to set aside the

Interlocutory Decree to the District Court in the guise of filing

objections to the Final Partition Plan.17 The Partition Law makes

no prohibition against a party who had failed to participate in

the trial to file objections to the proposed scheme of partition18,

but a party cannot attack the Judgment and the Interlocutory

Decree collaterally by means of filing objections to the proposed

scheme of partition. This course of action adopted by the 3A

defendant and confirmed by the learned District Judge is

entirely repugnant to Partition Law.

For the aforesaid reasons, I set aside the order of the District

Court dated 03.11.2006 and allow the appeal with costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

17 Vide the statement of objections and the corresponding affidavit dated 06.12.2005 at pages 84-97 of the brief, and the JE No. 118 at page 33-34 of the brief. 18 Anthony Appu v. Margret Fernando [1999] 3 Sri LR 85