1

CA-PHC-144-17 Page 1 of 10 28/03/2023 IJ-16-23

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal made in terms of Article 154 P (6) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. Officer-in-Charge,Anti Vice Unit, Head Quarters Police, Avissawella.

Complainant

Court of Appeal Application No CA (PHC) 144/2017 High Court of Avissawella No: Rev 14/2015 Magistrates Court of Avissawella No: 76404

Vs.

Kaludewa Padmini De Silva No: C/84, Ihala Talduwa, Avissawella.

Claimant

And Kaludewa Padmini De SilvaNo: C/84, Ihala Talduwa, Avissawella.

Claimant - Petitioner

Vs.

Officer-in-Charge,Anti Vice Unit, Head Quarters Police, Avissawella.

Complainant Respondent

2

CA-PHC-144-17 Page 2 of 10 28/03/2023 IJ-16-23

Hon. Attorney General,Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12.

Respondent

And Now Kaludewa Padmini De Silva No: C/84, Ihala Talduwa, Avissawella.

Claimant Petitioner - Appellant

Vs. Officer-in-Charge, Anti Vice Unit, Head Quarters Police, Avissawella. ComplainantRespondent-Respondent Hon. Attorney General Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12.

Respondent -Respondent

BEFORE :Menaka Wijesundera JNeil Iddawala J

COUNSEL :R.G.Piyadasa for the Appellant Jayalakshi De Silva SC for the state

Argued on : 09.02.2023

Decided on : 28.03.2023

3

CA-PHC-144-17 Page 3 of 10 28/03/2023 IJ-16-23

Iddawala J

This is an appeal filed against the order of the Provincial High Court of

Western Province holden in Avissawella dated 24.08.2017 which

affirmed the Avissawella Magistrates Court order dated 03.11.2015 to

confiscate the claimant petitioner -appellants (hereinafter the

appellant) vehicle under the Forest Ordinance, (as amended by Act No.

65 of 2009). The appellant has preferred this appeal to this Court to set

aside both orders and thereby disallow the confiscation of the vehicle

bearing registration No. 48-6996 (hereinafter the vehicle).

On or about 11.10.2014 the vehicle was taken into custody with

regards to a violation under Forest Ordinance, for transporting wood

logs worth Rs. 69,956.77/- without a valid permit. On 14.10.2014 R.M.

Sumith Priyantha-driver of the said vehicle at the time of wrongful act

(hereinafter the accused) pleaded guilty and a fine was imposed. An

inquiry was held on 17.03.2015 by the learned Magistrate to show

cause as to why the vehicle in question should not be confiscated.

At the inquiry the appellant who is the registered owner of the vehicle

gave evidence. After the conclusion of inquiry, the learned Magistrate

on 03.11.2015 ordered the vehicle to be confiscated as the appellant

had failed to satisfy the court with regard to proving she had taken all

precautions to prevent the commission of the offence as per Section 40

of the Forest Ordinance.

Aggrieved by the said decision, the appellant filed a revision application

in the Provincial High Court of Western Province holden in Avissawella,

which affirmed the order of the learned Magistrate and dismissed the

application. The appellant now seeks the Court of Appeal to set aside

the order dated 03.11.2015 delivered by the Avissawella Magistrate

4

CA-PHC-144-17 Page 4 of 10 28/03/2023 IJ-16-23

Court and the order dated 24.08.2017 delivered by the Western

Province High Court holden in Avissawella.

Before embarking upon the merits, the law pertinent to the application

merits being reproduced in the following manner: Section 40 of the

Forest Ordinance (as amended)

Where any person is convicted of a forest offence

(a) all timber or forest produce which is not the property of the State in

respect of which such offence has been committed;

and

(b) all tools, vehicles, implements, cattle and machines used in

committing such offence,

shall in addition to any other punishment specified for such offence,

be confiscated by the order of the convicting Magistrate:

Provide that in any case where the owner of such tools, vehicles,

implements and machines used in the commission of such offense,

is a third party, no Order of confiscation shall be made if such

owner proves to the satisfaction of the Court that he had taken all

precautions to prevent the use of such tool, vehicles, implements,

cattle and machines, as the case may be, for the commission of the

offense. (Emphasis added)

Accordingly, the Act has cast an indispensable burden on the third

party to an offence coming within the purview of Section 40 of the Forest

Ordinance, to dispense the burden of proving to the satisfaction of the

court that he/she, as the owner of the vehicle in dispute, has taken all

necessary precautionary measures to preclude the vehicle from being

used in acts of crime. Therefore, this court will primarily look into the

5

CA-PHC-144-17 Page 5 of 10 28/03/2023 IJ-16-23

contention whether the learned Magistrate has correctly applied the

relevant legal provisions and evaluated the evidence presented before

the court, in arriving at the final determination that the appellant has

failed to dispense the said burden.

While making submissions by the counsel for the appellant relied on

two grounds, namely, appellant has taken all precautions to prevent the

use of her vehicle for the commission of such offence to the satisfaction

of the court and there exists a fatal defect in the charge sheet where

accused pleaded guilty.

The learned Magistrate in delivering the order has examined whether

the appellant has sufficiently established ownership to the vehicle,

which was followed by an evaluation of the evidence given by the

appellant in relation to the precautionary steps taken by her.

Through an examination on the evidence given by the appellant it is

stated that the vehicle was used for transporting firewood as per the

request of companies such as Damro, Lalan, Hirdaramani & Prime

Polymers and stated that the lorry was also given for hiring purposes.

However, during the cross examination the appellant had admitted to

the fact she was not aware about the whereabouts of the transportation

of wood on the day of the incident. This indeed raised the concern over

why the appellant did not keep close monitoring on activities the lorry

was engaged in, on a daily basis. Thereby this can be considered

contrary to her claim of having taken all precautionary measures to

avoid the act of crime.

Furthermore, the appellant had also stated that the accused generally

comes to the appellants house each morning and takes the lorry for

hiring or work purposes and returns the vehicle back each evening after

the designated work. Nevertheless, there is no evidence brought forward

6

CA-PHC-144-17 Page 6 of 10 28/03/2023 IJ-16-23

that could establish, on the day of the specific incident the appellant

had taken any measures to look out to why the vehicle has not reached

home by the evening, as the alleged charge was claimed stating the lorry

was taken to custody at night.

This too draws the courts attention to consider that the appellant has

not taken any satisfactory precautionary measures to prevent the use

of the vehicle for the commission of the said offence.

His Lordship Chief Justice Priyasath Dep, PC in Orient Finance

Service Corporation Ltd. v Range Forest Officer, Ampara and

Another, SC Appeal No.120/2011 Minutes dated 10.12.2013, opined

that the registered ownerwho has the control over the vehicle is

required to satisfy court that he had taken precautions to prevent the

commission of the offence and that the offence was committed without

his knowledge.

It is apparent that in the present case even if the appellant had no

knowledge of the use of her vehicle to commit the offence, she should

be successful in establishing on a balance on probability that she had

taken all possible precautions to prevent the act of crime. Yet it is

clearly evident through the examined evidence that the appellant has

not been able to successfully establish on a balance of probability that

she took the necessary measures of precautions to prevent the said

offence.

In Jalathge Surasena v Officer in Charge, Police Station of

Hikkaduwa CA (PHC) APN 100/2014 Minutes dated 30.06.2015, it was

held that a mere denial of not having knowledge of the offence

committed is not sufficient to discharge the burden cast on a registered

owner of a vehicle.

7

CA-PHC-144-17 Page 7 of 10 28/03/2023 IJ-16-23

Thus, this Court is of the opinion that the appellant as the registered

owner stating that she had no knowledge of the commission of the

offence does not suffice to dispense the burden cast on her by Section

40 of the Act, to establish to the satisfaction of the court that she had

taken all necessary precautionary measure to prevent the offence

committed by the accused.

In the circumstances this court does not find any error in the reason

assigned and the determination arrived at, by both the learned

Magistrate and the learned High Court judge. However, during inquiry

the learned counsel for the appellant contended that the order to

confiscate the vehicle cannot be sustained when the charge to which

the accused had pleaded guilty is defective.

To support the said argument the counsel stated the charge sheet

claims: The vehicle bearing 48-6996 was involved in illegally

transporting 21 wood logs in Avissawella in the Colombo district and thus

was charged under Section 40 of the Forest Ordinance read with Section

26 (1) & (2) however, the counsel argues that the Forest Ordinance No.

65 of 2009 (as amended) (herein after the Act) does not include a

subsection as such. Thereby raised the claim that the charge sheet is

not valid and the accused was misled.

In response the Complainant-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter the

respondent) made a written submission admitting that the correct

Section should be Section 25 of the Act, but further stated the charge

is clear and that the accused have not been misled.

The appellant also further stated during the inquiry that the charge

sheet had not been signed and that though the offence committed was

stated it was not correctly mentioned that the offence was committed

during the night time.

8

CA-PHC-144-17 Page 8 of 10 28/03/2023 IJ-16-23

Considering the above claim intending to bring forward the matter of

charge sheet being defective and there by the alleged charge being

invalid, is not a steady ground of logical argument. This is because

though the appellant claims there has been minor defects in the charge

sheet the accused had been pleaded guilty of the offence and had paid

the fine imposed on him. Nevertheless, it can be said that charge is not

completely defective as the wording of the charge is clear and thus the

accused is not misled. And it is evident that on 14.10.2014 during the

trial at the Avissawella Magistrate Court the accused had been

represented by an Attorney-at-law, when the accused had admitted

committing of such offence and thereafter pleaded guilty for the charge

without any dispute or challenge .

Nevertheless, in CA (PHC) N0. 157/12 order dated 19.02.2015, His

lordship Justice K.T. Chitrasiri discussing the effect of a defective

charge sheet in a matter culminating in a confiscation of vehicle stated:

In this instance, the claim of the appellant who is not an accused in the

case had been made after the two accused were found guilty on their

own plea. Therefore, it is understood that the Court was not in a position

to consider the validity of the charge sheet at that belated point of time.

Indeed, an application under the aforesaid proviso to Section 40 in the

Forest Ordinance could only be made when confiscation has taken place

under the main Section 40 of the Forest Ordinance. Aforesaid main

Section 40 of the Forest Ordinance imposes a duty upon the Magistrate

who convicted the accused under the Forest Ordinance to confiscate the

vehicle used in committing such an offence. Furthermore, the word "shall"

is used in that main section and therefore the confiscation of the vehicle

is automatic when the accused is found guilty. Accordingly, it is clear that

the law referred to in the proviso to Section 40 is applicable only

9

CA-PHC-144-17 Page 9 of 10 28/03/2023 IJ-16-23

thereafter. Therefore, I conclude that the appellant who made the

application relying upon the proviso to Section 40 is not entitled to raise

an issue as to the defects in the charge after the accused have pleaded

guilty to the charge under Section 40 of the Forest Ordinance.

Furthermore, the person who makes a claim under the proviso to the

said Section 40 could not have made such an application unless and until

the accused are found guilty to a charge framed under the Forest

Ordinance. Hence, it is clear that he is making such a claim, knowing that

the accused were already been convicted for a particular charge under

the Forest Ordinance. Therefore, the appellant is estopped from claiming

the cover relying on the defects in the charge sheet, in his application

made under the proviso to Section 40 of the Forest Ordinance. Moreover,

in the event this court makes a determination on the issue as to the

defects in the charge sheet at this late stage, it may lead to raise

questions as to the conviction of the accused as well. Such a position is

illogical and certainly it will lead to absurdity. Such an absurdity should

not be allowed to prevail before the eyes of the law.

Similarly in CA (PHC) 95/2012 order dated 04.09.2018, Her Ladyship

Justice K. K. Wickremasinghe stated:

Accordingly, we are of the view that appellant should have raised his

objection with regard to the legality of the charge before the accused

pleaded guilty. We cannot allow the appellant to stand on the ground of

defective charge at this stage of appeal especially when the accused-

driver had pleaded guilty to the charge. Further we find that the accused-

driver could have availed his right of appeal separately against the said

conviction on the ground of defective charge when an appellant court

could have considered the merits of such case. We are not inclined to

interfere with the conviction of the accused-driver in an appeal that was

10

CA-PHC-144-17 Page 10 of 10 28/03/2023 IJ-16-23

emerged from a revision application made to the Hight Court against an

order of vehicle confiscation.

Thereby, for the aforesaid reasons and owning to the failure of the

appellant to prove on a balance of probability that the necessary

precautionary measures taken by her, this Court is of the view that the

learned Magistrate has duly delivered the order and the learned High

Court Judge has correctly dismissed the revision application.

Accordingly, this Courts finds no reason to interfere with the order of

the learned Judge of the Provincial High Court of Western Province

holden in Avissawella dated 24.08.2017 and the confiscation order of

the learned Magistrate of Avissawella dated 03.11.2015. Thereby, this

Court affirms the same.

The appeal is hereby dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Menaka Wijesundera J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL