CA/HCC/0160/22

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979.

Court of Appeal Case No.

CA/HCC/ 0160/2022 Mohomed Faris Mohomed Isham

High Court of Colombo

Case No. HC/1093/2019

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

P. Kumararatnam, J.

COUNSEL : Ruwan S.Jayawardena for the Appellant.

H.I.Peiris, SDSG for the Respondent.

CA/HCC/0160/22

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 11/10/2023

DECIDED ON : 05/02/2024

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Appellant was indicted in the High Court of Colombo for

committing one count of grave sexual abuse on the victim Ahamed Farhan,

punishable under Section 365(B) 2 (b) of the Penal Code as amended by Acts

No.29 of 1998 and No.16 of 2016.

As the Appellant pleaded not guilty to the charge, the trial was commenced

on 28/09/2020.

After leading all necessary witnesses, the prosecution had closed the case on

15/03/2022. The Learned High Court Judge had called for the defence and

the Counsel for the Appellant had moved for a day to call witnesses on his

behalf. The Appellant had made a dock statement and closed his case.

The Learned High Court Judge after considering the evidence presented by

both parties, convicted the Appellant as charged and sentenced him to 09

years rigorous imprisonment and imposed a fine of Rs.15,000/- subject to a

default sentence of 03 months simple imprisonment. In addition, a

compensation of Rs.200,000/- was ordered with a default sentence of 01-

year simple imprisonment.

CA/HCC/0160/22

3 | P a g e

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Presidents Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that

the Appellant had given consent to argue this matter in his absence due to

the Covid 19 pandemic. The Appellant was connected via Zoom from prison

during the argument.

The following grounds of appeal were raised on behalf of the Appellant

at the argument.

1. Whether the Learned High Court Judge has correctly assessed that the

prosecution has proved the offence described in the indictment against

the Appellant that he had committed the offence on the specific place

and date as described by PW1, beyond reasonable doubt.

2. Has the Learned High Court Judge misdirected himself in evaluating

evidence of the prosecution by failing to identify the clear-cut

contradictions between the evidence of PW1, PW2, PW4, PW6 and

PW8.

3. Has the Learned Hogh Court Judge failed to consider the

improbabilities of the version of the prosecution.

4. Did the Learned High Court Judge err in sentencing the Appellant for

an unreasonable and excessive term of imprisonment and granted an

excessive compensation to the victim.

Background of the case albeit as follows:

PW1 Farhan, was 17 years old when he gave evidence in court. The incident

of grave sexual abuse was taken place when he was just 5 years old.

Although he was unable to disclose the date of offence on which the offence

took place, he stated it happened to him either in 2008 or 2009. On the day

of the incident when he was playing with his friends near the mosque, the

Appellant had come there and taken him to a nearby house promising to give

biscuits to him. In the house where the incident happened, he had seen an

CA/HCC/0160/22

4 | P a g e

old lady was sleeping on a bed and the Appellant had taken the victim

upstairs of the house, removed his clothes and had committed anal sex on

him. Although he tried to shout, he couldnt as the Appellant prevented him

from doing so. After committing the offence, the Appellant had taken the

victim to victims grandmothers house and told them that the victim got

injured when he climbed to an iron post. The victim did not tell to his

grandmother about the incident due to fear of the Appellant. But later

divulged the incident to his mother when he went to his home.

PW2, Shafeena, mother of the victim had corroborated what the victim told

in court. She further said when the victim started to cry, she had asked him

as to what happened and the victim had divulged incident and told her that

the Appellant was the person committed the offence to him. Before lodging a

police complaint, the matter was brought to the attention of the Appellant

but he denied the incident.

According to PW6 Mahakumbura, the JMO who examined the victim stated

that he examined the victim on 12/02/2009 at the Lady Ridgway Hospital,

Colombo. As the victim could not give proper history due to his tender age,

his mother PW2 had given the history to the doctor. The JMO had noted

three injuries in the anal of the victim and confirmed that there is evidence

of an anal intercourse.

The foundation in a criminal trial is the charge. By charging, an accused is

provided information as to the nature of the allegation levelled against him.

The charge must identify the act committed by the accused, the law alleged

to have been violated by him and particulars pertaining to the alleged offence

must be specified in the charge.

It is the profound duty of a prosecutor to frame the charge/s after careful

consideration of evidence available in the case at the time of drafting the

charge. The requirements of a valid charge are set out in Sections 164 and

165 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979.

CA/HCC/0160/22

5 | P a g e

In the first ground, the Learned Counsel for the Appellant contended that

the date of incident and place of incident have not been established by the

prosecution beyond reasonable doubt.

In the indictment, the date of offence has been clearly mentioned. The victim

giving evidence had clearly said that the incident had taken place either in

2008 or 2009. The victim was just over five years old when he encountered

this bitter ordeal. But PW2 had clearly mentioned the date of incident in her

evidence. As per the Section 165 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15

of 1979, the Appellant had been given reasonable notice regarding the time

of incident. For clarity the Section 165 of CPC is re-produced below:

Particulars as to time, place and person.

(1) The charge shall contain such particulars as to the time and place

of the alleged offence and as to the person (if any) against whom and

as to the thing (if any) in respect of which it was committed as are

reasonably sufficient to give the accused notice of the matter with

which he is charged and to show that the offence is not prescribed.

(2) When the accused is charged with criminal breach of trust or

dishonest misappropriation of movable property, it shall be sufficient

to specify the gross sum or, as the case may be, the gross quantity in

respect of which the offence is alleged to have been committed, and

the dates between which the offence is alleged to have been committed

without specifying particular items or exact dates, and the charge so

framed shall be deemed to be a charge of one offence within the

meaning of section 174:

Provided that the time included between the first and last of such dates

shall not exceed one year.

(3) When the nature of the case is such that the particulars mentioned

in section 164 and the preceding subsections of this section do not

give the accused sufficient notice of the matter with which he is

CA/HCC/0160/22

6 | P a g e

charged, the charge shall also contain such particulars of the manner

in which the alleged offence was committed as will be sufficient for that

purpose.

In Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai v. State of Gujarat (supra) the court held further:

In regard to exact time of an incident, or the time duration of an

occurrence, usually, people make their estimates by guess work on the

spur of the moment at the time of interrogation. And one cannot expect

people to make very precise or reliable estimates in such matters.

It is unrealistic to expect a witness to be a human tape recorder.

In R. v. Dossai 13 Cr.App.R. 158 the court held that:

A date specified in an indictment is not a material matter unless it is

an essential part of the alleged offence; the defendant may be convicted

although the jury finds that the offence was committed on a date other

than that specified in the indictment. Amendment of the indictment is

unnecessary, although it will be good practice to do so (provided that

there is no prejudice below) where it is clear on the evidence that if the

offence was committed at all, it was committed on the day other than

that specified.

As the Appellant had been given sufficient notice regarding the date of offence

under which he had been indicted and led plausible evidence through

witnesses regarding the period, I conclude that this has not caused any

prejudice or failure of justice as the Appellant had raised a totally different

issue in the trial. The Learned High Court Judge in his judgment had

addressed this issue very correctly to come to his decision. The relevant

portion of the judgment is re-produced below:

CA/HCC/0160/22

7 | P a g e

Page 208-209 of the brief.

kaos; orejdg isoah is jQ oskh ksYa;j mejiSug yelshdjla fkdue;s jQjo Tyq isoah

is jQ wjia:dfoS wjqre 5 l l=vd <uhl= u iy isoah is wjqre 11 lg muK miqj

wjqre 17 l mdi,a isiqjl= f,i idlaIs ,nd oS ;su hk miqu i,ld ne,SfoS fujeks

wdldrfha wysrs ,sx.sl w;aoelS ienkau yels blaukska wu;l lr oeu idudkH ukqIH

iajNdjh jk w;r fuu idlaIslre o fuu isoah is jQ oskh wu;l lr oud ;su ienkau

h yels lreKls' flfia fj;;a isoah is jqfka 2008 jif 2009 jif fuka u;l

njg fuu idlaIslre meyeos,sj mjid we;s w;r wfpdaokd m;%fha i`oyka fpdaokdfjys

i`oyka lr we;af;a o 2009 jif oS fuu wmrdOh is jQ njhs' ta wkqj isoah is jQ

oskh inkaOfhka fuu idlaIslref.a idlaIsfhka ksIa;ju lreKq fy,s fkdjqko fuu

kvqf idlaIs ,nd oS we;s me'id' 2 tk kaos; orejdf.a uj jk fudfydu id,aoska

whqkq,a mcskd kue;a;shf.a idlaIsh wkqj isoah is jqfka 2009 fmnrjdrs ui 10 jk osk

i`oyka lr we;s miqu ;=, wfpdaokd m;%fha jro is jQ oskh ta wkqj uekka ikd:

we;'

In the 2nd ground the Learned Counsel argued that the Learned High Court

Judge misdirected himself in evaluating evidence of the prosecution by

failing to identify the clear-cut contradictions between the evidence of PW1,

PW2, PW4, PW6 and PW8.

In the 3rd ground Learned Counsel argued that the Learned High Court

Judge failed to consider the improbabilities of the version of the prosecution.

As the 2nd and 3rd grounds are interconnected, both grounds will be

addressed together hereinafter.

In a case of this nature, the testimonial trustworthiness and credibility of the

victim, mainly the probability should be assessed with utmost care and

caution by the trial judge. The learned Trial Judge must satisfy and accept

the evidence of a child witness after assessing his competence and credibility

as a witness.

CA/HCC/0160/22

8 | P a g e

In Ranjeet Kumar Ram v. State of Bihar [2015] SCC Online SC 500 the

court held that:

Evidence of the child witness and its credibility would depend upon the

circumstances of each case. Only precaution which the court has to bear

in mind while assessing the evidence of a child witness is that the

witness must be a reliable one.

The Learned High Court Judge in his judgment very extensively considered

the evidence given by PW1 and is satisfied that the evidence given by the

victim passes the credibility.

Additionally, after considering the testimony of each witness, it was

determined that the contradictions marked on the evidence did not impact

the case's foundation. (Pages 209-224 of the brief)

In The Attorney General v.Sandanam Pitchai Mary Theresa [2011] 2 SLR

292 the court held that:

Whilst internal contradictions or discrepancies would ordinarily affect

the trustworthiness of the witness statement, it is well established that

the Court must exercise its judgment on the nature of the inconsistency

or contradiction and whether they are true material to the facts in issue.

Further, the Learned High Court Judge had very correctly held that that the

evidence given by the witnesses pass the test of consistency, spontaneity,

probability and concluded that the prosecution had proved the case beyond

reasonable doubt.

In the final ground of appeal, the Learned Counsel contended that the

Learned High Court Judge erred in sentencing the Appellant for an

CA/HCC/0160/22

9 | P a g e

unreasonable and excessive term of imprisonment and granted an excessive

compensation to the victim.

When sentencing an accused, the judge ensures that he passed a fair

sentence and in proportion to the crime. The sentence must also be in

proportion to the accuseds degree of responsibility. Further, the Judge must

respect the minimum and maximum sentences set out in law and the

sentence must be just.

The sentence prescribed for the offence under Section 365B (2) (b) of the

Penal Code is as follows:

(b) commits grave sexual abuse on. any person under eighteen years of

age shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term not less

than seven years and not exceeding twenty years and with fine and shall

also be ordered to pay compensation of an amount determined by court

to the person. in respect of whom the offence was committed for the

injuries caused to such person.".

The Learned High Court Judge in his sentencing order had considered all

factors which should have been considered before passing the sentence. The

victim's age was taken into consideration by the Learned High Court, which

is a factor that calls for a harsher sentence as the victim was a minor. He

had also considered the age of the Appellant when he committed the offence.

Considering these factors, the Learned High Court Judge had passed a lower

sentence which is very much reasonable considering the facts and the

circumstances of the case. Further, he had passed a very reasonable fine

and compensation.

Hence, I conclude that the appeal grounds raised by the Appellant have no

merit.

As discussed under the appeal grounds advanced by the Appellant, the

prosecution had adduced strong and incriminating evidence against the

CA/HCC/0160/22

10 | P a g e

Appellant. The Learned High Court Judge had very correctly analyzed all the

evidence presented by both parties and had concluded that the Appellant is

guilty to the charge.

As the Learned High Court Judge had rightly convicted the Appellant for the

charge levelled against him in the indictment, I affirm the conviction and

dismiss the Appeal of the Appellant.

Considering further, I order the 09-year rigorous imprisonment deem to have

been commenced from the date of judgment i.e., on 16.06.2022.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Colombo along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL