In the Court of Appeal of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka

C.A. (PHC) No: 29/2016

H.C. Case No: Writ 01 /20 15

Before: Prasantha De Silva, 1

S.U.B. Karalliyadde, 1

In the matter of an Application for writs in

the nature of Certiorari and Mandamus in

terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka, against the order dated 29.03.2016

of the Provincial High Court of Chilaw in

action bearing No. HC/Writ 1/2015

Udeni Piyumantha Mahawithana, No.200, Puttalama Road,

Chilaw

VS

H.M.Sirisena, Maasptha Waththa,

Maaspotha

And Others

Petitioner- Appellant

Respondent-Respondents

Counsel: Mr. 1.M. Wijebandara, AAL with Mr. K. Pathirage, AAL

for the Petitioner - Appellant.

Mr. C. Ekanayake SC for the Respondent - Respondents.

Written Submission tendered by the: Petitioner - Appellant on 15-06-2020.

Respondent - Respondents on 08-11-2019.

1

..

Argued on: 25-01-2021.

Decided on: 25-03-2021.

S. u.B. Karalliyadde, J.

By this appeal the Petitioner-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Petitioner) seek to

set aside the order dated 29.03.2015 of the learned High Court Judge of Chi law in action

bearing No. HC/Writ 01 /2015. By that order, the learned High Court Judge has dismissed

the applications of the Petitioner for writ of Certiorari to quash the decision of the

Provincial Public Service Commission of the North Western Province (hereinafter

referred to as the PPSC of the North Western Province) to interdict him from the Sri Lanka

Teachers' Service and the decision of the Governor of the North Western Province

(hereinafter referred to as the Governor) in appeal, to affirm the decision of the PPSC of

the North Western Province and a writ of Mandamus directing the PPSC of the North

Western Province Provincial to reinstate him. The decisions of the PPSC of the North

Western Province and the Governor are marked as @o 8 and @o 9 respectively.

The Petitioner was a teacher in the Sri Lanka Teachers' Service and while he was serving

as the acting Principal of Illippadeniya Vidyalya in Chilaw, he was interdicted on

20.12.2012 alleging that he had committed sexual harassments to the female students of

the said school. Thereafter, a disciplinary inquiry was held against him by the PPSC of

the North Western Province. Simultaneously the Petitioner was prosecuted by the Police

in two actions before the Magistrate's Court of Chilaw under section 345 of the Penal

Code (as amended by the Act, No. 22 of 1995) for the alleged sexual harassments. The

Magistrate's Court proceedings were concluded on 30.08.2013. by discharging the

Petitioner from the charges due to lack of interest shown by the witnesses to give evidence

at the trial.

At the disciplinary inquiry held by the PPSC of the North Western Province, the Petitioner

was found guilty to all charges against him and he was interdicted by the letter No.

2

PPSC/t)25)(.l1 1/1/13/20 dated 25-08-2014 (marked as 0 0 - 8). Against that decision, the

Petitioner preferred an appeal to the Governor urging to reconsider the decision of the

PPSC of the North Western Province. Nevertheless, that appeal was dismissed by the

Governor by the letter NWP/Gov.AD4/2/1 /48 dated 09-02-09 (marked as 0 0 - 9).

Thereafter, the Petitioner sought reliefs by way of writs from the High Court of Chilaw

against the decisions of the PPSC of the North Western Province and the Governor. Before

the High Court, the respondent-respondents (hereinafter referred to as the Respondents)

took up a preliminary legal objection that the High Court has no jurisdiction to hear and

decide the case and sought to dismiss the action. Having considered the submissions made

on behalf of both parties, the learned High Court Judge, upholding the objection of the

Respondents, dismissed the action. Being aggrieved by the decision of the High Court, the

Petitioner preferred this appeal seeking reliefs, to set aside the order of the High Court and

quash the decisions of the PPSC of the North Western Province and the Governor by writs

of Certiorari and order directing the PPSC of the North Western Province to reinstate him

in the Sri Lanka Teachers' Service by writ of Mandamus.

One of the arguments of the learned Counsel for the Petitioner before this Court is that the

jurisdictional objection raised by the Respondents before the High Court that the Petitioner

is not entitled to have and maintain the applications for writ of Certiorari as he has an

alternative remedy of appealing against the decision of the PPSC of the North Western

Province to the Public Service Commission (hereinafter referred to as the PSC) should have

pleaded as a defence and not raised as a preliminary legal objection. Therefore, the learned

Counsel argues that for the reason that the Respondents have not taken up the jurisdictional

objection by way of pleadings, it deems that the jurisdictional objection is waved off.

After the statement of objections dated 23.09.2015. of the Respondents were tendered to

the High Court, the Petitioner has filed his counter-objections on 20.10.2015. Thereafter,

both the Petitioner and the Respondents had addressed the Court on the preliminary legal

objection raised on behalf of the Respondents on written submissions and the learned High

Court Judge has delivered the impugned order on the written submissions of the parties.

Irrespective of the fact whether the position of the Respondents should have taken up as a

preliminary legal objection or as a defence, the Petitioner has given an opportunity by the

3

learned High Court Judge to meet the argument of the Respondents by way of counter-

objections and written submissions. Therefore, I am of the view that a prejudice has not

been caused to the Petitioner by taking up the position that the High Court is lack of

jurisdiction as a preliminary legal objection without stating that in the pleadings as a

defence.

The parties are not at variance about the fact that the powers of the Central Public Service

Commission (hereinafter referred to as the PSC) regarding the disciplinary control over the

Petitioner are delegated to the PPSC of the North Western Province. To substantiate the

position of the Respondents that the Provincial High Court has no jurisdiction to decide the

application for writs, the learned State Counsel for the Respondents referred to Article 61

A of the Constitution.

Article 61 A of the Constitution states thus;

'Subject to the provisions of paragraphs (I), (2), (3), (4) and (5) of Article 126, no court or

tribunal shall have power or jurisdiction to inquire into, or pronounce upon or in any

manner call in question any order or decision made by the Commission (the PSC), a

Committee (appointed by the PSC) or any Public Officer (appointed by the PSC), in

pursuance of any power or duty conferred or imposed on such Commission, or delegated

to a Committee or Public Officer, under this Chapter or under any other law. '

Therefore, considering the above stated constitutional provisions, the Court can agree with

the argument of the learned State Counsel that the Provincial High Court has no jurisdiction

to entertain the writ applications filed by the Petitioner.

Another argument of the learned Counsel for the Petitioner is that the decision of the

learned High Court Judge to dismiss the action for the reason that the Petitioner had not

exhausted the alternative remedy available to him i.e., lodging an appeal against the order

of the PPSC of the North Western Province to the PSC is against the law. That argument

of the learned Counsel is based on the assumption that there is no Article in the Constitution

and lor any Act of the Parliament, which stipulates that an aggrieved party from a decision

of a Provincial Public Service Commission has the appealable right to the PSC.

Considering the submissions of the learned State Counsel for the Respondents, the learned

4

High Court Judge has come to a conclusion that in terms of Appendix III of the

Constitution, the Petitioner had an alternative remedy of appealing to the PSC.

The learned State Counsel citing the authorities of Thennakoon V.I'. Direc/or General of

ClIs/oms and O/hers [2004 (I) SLR 53], Obeysekara Vs. Alber/ and O/hers [1978 (2) SLR

220] and Rex Vs. Inland Revenue Commissioner ex. Pe/erson (1985 AC 260) argues that

for the failure of the Petitioner to exhaust the alternative remedy available to him, the writ

applications should be dismissed.

Appendix III item 3 of the Constitution states thus;

'The transfer and disciplinary control of all educational personnel, i.e., Teachers, Principals

and Education Officers, Officers belonging to a National Service but serving the Provincial

authority on secondment will have the right of appeal to the Public Service Commission.

Officers belonging to the Provincial Public Service will have a right to appeal to the Public

Service Commission against dismissal.'

The learned Counsel for the Petitioner argues that the words 'will have a right to appeal'

there should construe that those provisions would operate 'as and when the appealable right

and procedure is laid down by the law in the future.' The learned Counsel for the Petitioner

also argues that nowhere in a statute stipulate an appellate procedure against a decision of

a Provincial Public Service Commission to the PSC and therefore, the argument of the

learned State Counsel that the Petitioner has an alternative remedy is without merits.

Article 58 (2) of the Constitution states that;

'Any public officer aggrieved by any order of transfer or dismissal, or any other order

relating to a disciplinary matter made by a public officer to whom the Public Service

Commission or any Committee thereof has delegated its powers under the preceding

paragraph shall have a right of appeal to the Public Service Commission or such

Committee, as the ease may be.'

Furthermore, Article 59 (2) of the Constitution provides thus;

'The Administrative Appeal Tribunal shall have the power to alter, vary or rescind any

order or decision made by the Commission.'

5

Therefore, when considering the above stated Constitutional provisions it is clear that a

public officer who is dissatisfied with a decision of a Provincial Public Service

Commission has a right to appeal to the PSC and from there to the Administrative Appeal

Tribunal (the AA T).

By section 3 ofthe Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act, No.4 of2002 powers is delegated

to the AA T to hear and determine any appeal preferred to it from any order or decision

made by the PSC in exercising its powers under Chapter IX of the Constitution.

Furthermore, the Establishment Code stipulates the provisions regarding appeals and

appeal procedures against the disciplinary orders. Section 26:5 of the Establishment Code

provides that any public officer who is dissatisfied with a disciplinary order could appeal

to the PSC and by section 26.10 appeal rights are given to such officers to the Cabinet of

Ministers against the decisions of the PSC. Therefore, the above stated Constitutional and

statutory provisions have guaranteed the appeal rights of an educational personal against

any order ofa Provincial Public Service Commission to the PSC and from there to the AAT

or to the Cabinet of Ministers.

Hence, in the instant case, the Petitioner had alternative remedies of appealing against the

decision of the PPSC of the North Western Province to the PSC and ifhe was not satisfied

with the decision of the PSC, he could have appealed to the AA T or to the Cabinet of

Ministers before seeking reliefs from the Provincial High Court by way of a writ.

Therefore, the Court cannot agree with the above stated argument of the learned Counsel

for the Petitioner.

The learned Counsel for the Petitioner has cited three authorities in his written submissions

to substantiate his position. The learned Counsel argues that in the case of Sirisena Ys.

Kotawera- Udaganla Co-Operative Stores Ltd, (51 NLR 262) the court had issued a writ

even if there was an alternative remedy. In that case the decision which was challenged by

way of writs had been taken by the authorities exceeding the statutory power conferred on

them. Therefore, the facts considered in that case are different to the facts of the case in

hand and in the instant case the Petitioner does not challenge that the PPSC of the North-

Western Province had exceeded its statutory powers. In the cases of Linus Silva Ys.

University Council ofYidyodaya University (64 NLR 104) and Somasundaram Ys. Forbes

6

and Others which the learned Counsel cited, the writs were issued for the reason that the

alternative remedies available to the petitioners were not adequate, effective and

satisfactory. But, in the instant case, as stated hereinbefore, the Petitioner had the right to

appeal against the decision of the PPSC of the North-Western Province to the PSC and

from there to the AAT or to the Cabinet of Ministers. Therefore, [ am of the view that the

Petitioner in the instant action had adequate, satisfactory and effective remedies and

without exhausting those remedies, he is not entitled to seek reliefs from the High Court

by way of writs.

The Courts repeatedly refused to exercise its writ jurisdiction when there are alternative

remedies. It was held in the case of Tennakoon Vs. DG of Customs (supra) that; " ... The

petitioner has an alternative remedy, as the Customs Ordinance itself provides for such

course of action under Sec. 154. In the circumstances the petitioner is not entitled to invoke

writ jurisdiction ... "

In Kahapolage Kithsiri Palitha Fernando Vs. The Registrar General and Others, (CA Writ

Application No. 43/2012, Decided on 07.07.2015) it was held that; ' .... A mandate in the

nature of a writ is being a discretionary remedy, will not grant if alternative remedy is

available.'

It was held in the case of K.A. Gunesekara Vs. T.B. Weerakoon, Assistant Government

Agent, Kurunegala) (73 NLR, 621) that; ' ... the (writ) application should be refused

because ... (b) the petitioner had an alternative remedy .... '

[n Dedigarna Vs. Preventive Officer, Sri Lanka Customs and Others, (2004, SriLR 371) it

was held that ' ... Availability of an alternative remedy (Sec. 164) prevents the petitioner

from seeking reliefby way ofa prerogative writ.'

[n the case of Ishak Vs_ Lakshman Perera, DG of Customs al/d other, [2003 (3) SLR 18

at page 22) it was held that 'Where there is an alternative procedure which will provide

the applicant with a satisfactory remedy, the courts will usually insist on an applicant

exhausting that remedy before seekingjudicial review. /n doing so, the court is coming to

a discretionary decision. Where there is a choice of another separate process outside the

courts, a true question for the exercise of discretion exists. For the court to require the

7

alternative procedure 10 exhausled prior 10 resloring 10 judicial review is in accord wilh

judicial review being properly regarded as being a remedy of last resort. It is important

that the process should not be clogged with unnecessary cases, which are peljeclly capable

of being dealt with in another tribunal. It can also be the siluation that the Parliament, by

establishing an alternative procedure, indicated eilher expressly or by implication that it

intends that procedure to be used, in exercising its discretion the court will allach

importance to the indication of parliament 's intention . ... '

de Smith in 'Judicial Review of Administrative Action' {4th Ed.} states that 'it is

(Mandamus) pre-eminently a discretionary remedy' (at page 540) and 'Mandamus has

always been awarded as an extraordinary, residuary and suppletory remedy, to be granted

only when there is no other means of obtaining justice' (at page 561). For the reason that

in the instant case the Petitioner is not entitled for writ of Certiorari, I hold that he is not

entitled to a writ of Mandamus sought by him.

Considering all the above stated facts, I hold that the order of the learned High Court Judge

dated 29.03.2015. dismissing the application of the Petitioner is according to law, and

necessity does not arise for this Court to interfere with that order. Therefore, I affirm the

order of the learned High Court Judge dated 29.03.2015 and dismiss this action. The

Petitioner should pay Rs. 50 000/= as costs of this Court to the Respondents.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

I agree.

Prasantha De Silva J.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

8