Page 1 of 6

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Case No of the Court Of Appeal:

CPA/ 05/2021

Case No of the High Court of

Negombo: HC 215 / 20

In the matter of an application for

revision in terms of Article 138 of the

Constitution read with the Section

404 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No 15 of 1979.

The Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka.

Complainant.

Vs.

Kanapathi Ramesh Kumar Alias

Manthree Kanna.

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Jazeema Abdul Raheem

Randiya Uyana Flats,

Henamulla Modara,

Colombo 15.

Page 2 of 6

Before Menaka Wijesundera J.

Neil Iddawala J.

Counsel Tenny Fernando with

Prashani Matharage

For the petitioner.

Priyani Abeygunawardana

S.C for the A.G

Argued On 27.07.2021

Decided On 03.08.2021

Petitioner

On behalf of

Kanapathi Ramesh Kumar Alias

ManthreeKanna.

Languishing in Remand Prison

Kaluthara (D 21264)

Accused

Vs.

The. Hon Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12

Complainant Respondent

Page 3 of 6

MENAKA WIJESUNDERA J.

The instant application for revision has been filed to set aside the order dated

10.9.2020 of the learned High Court Judge of Negambo.

In the instant application the accused has been taken in to custody by the Police

Narcotics Bureau on 25.3.2016 for being in possession of 5kg and 240 grams of

heroin gross weight. Subsequently he was indicted for 2kg and 723 grams of the

same on 10.9.2020.

The position of the accused is that he is denying the allegation and he has been in

remand custody since the date of arrest up to date which totals up to more than

five years which is not fair and just especially in view of the fact that some of the

officers in the team who arrested him are now incarcerated for similar offences

committed while in office. Therefore the accused further stated that if so the

integrity of the officers who arrested and incarcerated him is in serious doubt

therefore whether it is fair and just for him to be in remand for nearly five years

for an incident of that nature?

The position of the respondents is that the credibility of the witnesses should be

decided at trial stage.

In the instant case the accused has been indicted and arrested under the

provisions of the Poisons and Opium and Dangerous Drugs Act nu 13 of 1984,

under which Act according to section 83(1) a person indicted under sections of

54A and 54B of this Ordinance can be enlarged on bail only on exceptional

conditions.

The term exceptional has been defined in many places in our legal history and

finally it has been decided that the exceptional conditions should be decided

Page 4 of 6

according to the facts of each case ,as well said in Ramu Thamodarumpillai vs.

Attorney General 2004 3 SLR 180.

This Court also note the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act nu 15

of 1979 , under section 364, three aspects have been defined as important to be

considered in revision applications and they are ,

1) Illegality of any order,

2) The impropriety of any order,

3) The irregularity of any order.

The above aspects have been discussed in Attorney General vs. Ranasinghe and

others 1993 (2) SLR81.

In the instant application this Court observes that the Chief investigative officers

who have conducted the raid to arrest the accused are now in remand for acts of

similar nature committed while on duty, therefore then the question arises as to

the credibility of the investigations conducted by such officers and whether it is

fair to incarcerated a person for nearly five years on material collected during

such investigations.

It is the contention of the learned State Counsel that the credibility of any

witness should be decided at trial stage and not in an application for bail, but this

Court observes that at trial stage what is considered is the guilt of an accused

based on the authencity and the acceptability of evidence of witnesses, but at

the stage of a bail application what a Court decides is whether it is fair and just to

incase rate an accused before conviction or acquittal if the other party is alleging

an irregularity or unusual circumstance which warrants the interfervention of

Court, and this instance this Court observes to be one such deserving instance, in

Page 5 of 6

fact before conviction or acquittal an accused should enjoy the benefit of the

presumption of innocence laid down in the law of evidence and his personal

liberty should be hampered only on suitable grounds.

Therefore the position taken up by the respondents that the credibility of the

witnesses should be considered only at trial stage, this Court is unable to accept.

The learned Counsel for the respondents has cited a decided case by Wengappuly

J, but in the said judgment what has been considered is bail upon conviction,

which is not the situation in the instant application.

The respondents have further alleged that the accused has previous convictions

of similar nature and that the order of the learned Judge does not carry any

material to invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of this Court.

Upon considering the submissions of both parties it is the considered view of this

Court that it is only fair and just to revise the order of the learned High Court

Judge in view of the questionable investigations which has been conducted

against the accused.

Hence the instant application for revision is allowed and the accused is enlarged

on bail on the following conditions,

1) A cash bail of Rs 2 million,

2) Two sureties to the value of Rs 1 million each,

3) The accused to report to the police Narcotics Beruea, on every Sunday of the

month

4) The accused to surrender his passport to the registrar of the relevant High

Court.

Page 6 of 6

The Registrar of this Court is hereby directed to convey this order to the relevant

High Court.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.

I agree.

Neil Iddawala J.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.