....

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

High court Kegalle

In the matter of an Application for Revision in Terms of Article 138 of the Constitution read with Sec. 364 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No: 15 of 1979.

1. Illandarage Wasantha

Case No: HC 1468/2000 Detawala.

Karadupana, Kegalle.

Court of Appeal

Revision Application 1 st Accused - Petitioner

No: CA (PHC) APN 138/2016

2. Mahanamagam Geeganage Piyadasa

alias Baale

Detawala.

Karadupana, Kegalle

2nd Accused-Petitioner.

3. Panawala Ralalage Sarath Bandara

Panawala,

Thibbatumunuwa

Hettimulla.

Kegalle.

3rd Accused - Petitioner.

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General,

2

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant-Respondent.

CA(PRC)APN 138/2016 PRC Kegalle 1468/2000

Before K.K.Wickremasinghe J &

P.Padman Surasena, J

Counsel Varunika Hettige DSG for the Respondent.

Decided on 14.06.2017.

P .Padman Surasena, J.

This case is flxed for argument today. The Petitioner is absent and

unrepresented. No application of any sort is made before this court on

behalf of the Petitioner. Nevertheless this court kept this case down to be

taken up as the last case to enable the counsel to make some

arrangement and appear in this case before this court. However no one

turned up. Since this case is flxed for argument this Court decided to

take this case for argument. Learned D.S.G made submissions setting

out the back ground of the case.

The Petitioner in this application has prayed in his prayers that

this court should set aside the order of the Learned High Court Judge

dated 13.10.2016 marked P1(C).

. ~

3

The said order is an order made by the learned High Court Judge

of Kegalle calling for the accused to place their defence in terms of

Section 200 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act. Learned High Court

Judge has explained the rights of the accused also and fIxed further

trial for another date. It is this order that is being challenged in this

application. Learned D.S.G brought to the notice of this court that there

are two eye witnesses who have given evidence before the High Court.

Learned D.S.G also brought to the notice of this court that witness

Perumbadapedige Lalith Ranasinghe who was called by the prosecution

to give evidence before the High Court has identifIed all three accused.

It appears from the brief that this is a re - trial that is

being held after this Court had ordered a re-trial in an appeal flIed

subsequent to the accused being convicted in the trial held before.

Perusing of the indictment shows that the date of offence of this case

is 1999.08.06. It is a date approximately 17 years ago from today.

Learned D.S.G states to Court that there is a stay order which has

been in operation. The said stay order has withheld the progress of

the trial.

The Learned D.S.G. further brought to the notice of this

Court the Judgment in Attorney -General Vs. Gunawardena reported in

1996 2 SLR page 149 and submitted before this Court that this Court

should facilitate the progress of the trial in the High Court.

t I

I I,

!

, ~ ,

4

Indeed the legality, propriety and irrationality ( if any) of

this order could be challenged in an appeal if the accused elects to

appeal in case of a conviction. This court cannot see that the end of this

case in the High Court is far away as it is now at the tail end. This

court is also of the opinion that it is best to leave all the matters with

regard to the sufficiency and credibility of evidence in the hands of the

learned High Court Judge who can decide them at the end of the trial.

We see no basis to revise the order dated 13.10.2016 made by the

learned High Court Judge. Therefore, we decide to refuse this application

and proceed to dismiss this application.

Registrar of this court is directed to communicate this order to the

learned High Court Judge without delay.

Application is dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K.K.Wickremasinghe, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Vkg/-

, I I I I If f

t

f

\ II I I I ! i