1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for mandates

in the nature of Writ of Certiorari and

Mandamus under and in terms of Article 140 of

the Constitution of Sri Lanka

1. Punchage Gunawathy

2. Punchage Sumana Piyaseeli

Both of Kohombagaskada,

Mahapothana.

PETITIONERS

CA/WRIT/35/2014 Vs,

Before

1. R.K.S.S.c. Wijesinghe,

Provincial Land Commissioner, North Central Province, Anuradhapura.

2. N .H.R. Nishantha, Divisional Secretary, Divisional Secretariat, Kahatagasdigili ya, Anuradhapura.

3. Punchage Mali.

4. Punchage Premawathie.

Both of Thonigala, Mahapothana.

RESPONDENTS

: Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J (PICA) &

H.C.J. Madawala J

Counsel: Ashiq Hassim and P.Kumari for the Petitioners

Anusha Samaranayake sse for the 1st and 2nd Respondents

T. Wickramanayake and Pulasthi Hewamanna for the 3rd and 4th Respondents

Argued On:

Written Submissions On:

Order On:

Order

20.05.2015

03.06.2015, 12.06.2015

01.09.2015

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J (PICA)

2

Petitioners to the present application Punchage Gunawathy and Punch age Sumana Piyaseeli has

come before this court seeking inter alia,

b. to issue a mandate in the nature of a Writ of Mandamus, directing the 1st and lor 2nd

Respondents to accept the Petitioners" as the lawful sole nominees and successors of the

permit granted to their late father under the Land Development Ordinance and grant the

Petitioners permit in respect of same,

c. to issue a mandate in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari, quashing the 1st and lor 2nd

Respondents acceptance of the nomination by late Horathalage Pinchi (as contained in P-

4) of the 3rd and 4th Respondents ,as the successors to the permit of their late father,

3

The Petitioners' late father, 8aiyyage Puncha had been granted a permit under the Land

Development Ordinance No. 19 of 1953 in respect of land to the extent of four Acres from

Kohombagaskada, Kahatagasdigiliya in the District of Anuradhapura.

According to the Petitioners' their father had passed away in the year 1995 and prior to his death

nominated the two Petitioners as his successors as evident in document produced marked P-1A

subject to the life interest of Petitioners' mother Horathalage Pinchi.

The said life interest holder had passed away on 13.09.2011 and thereafter the Petitioners' had

addressed a letter to the 2nd Respondent dated 16.10.2011 (P-6) calling upon him to recognize the

Petitioners as the successors to the permit of their late father.

As there was no progress of the said matter the Petitioner's brought the matter to the notice of the

1st Respondent. During this Period the Petitioners got to know, that the said Horathalage Pinchi

who was only the life interest holder of the said permit holder, had purported to nominate the 3rd

and 4th Respondents as the successor to the said permit.

The Petitioners have submitted that the said position is confirmed by the endorsement marked as

P-1A in document P-1 (Both Sinhala and English versions) where the name of the Petitioners and

their mother appear there to. The Petitioners further submits that mother had only a life interest to

the said land and therefore she does not have power or legal capacity to nominate a successor to

the said land.

Petitioners have heavily relied on a letter purported to have been sent by the 1st Respondent to the

2nd Respondent, dated 02.11.2012 (P-8) wherein he directed the 2nd Respondent to recognize the

Petitioners as the lawful successors to the permit of late Baiyyage Punch a for reason that,

3. As per the 1st ledger entry at the time they said Horatalage Pinchi was granted a life

interest, the Petitioners alone had been named as successors to Baiyyage Punch a

4

b. The other two names (3rd and 4th Respondents) had been entered subsequently at the

request of Horatalage Pinchi, who had only a life interest and therefore did not have legal

capacity to effect a nomination

c. Therefore the subsequent nomination of the 3rd and 4th Respondents were of no force or

avail in law

Even though the Petitioners relied on the above letter, Petitioners were not being able to place

material to the satisfaction of this court, whether the nomination of 3rd and 4th Respondents were

made by the life interest holder of the late permit holder Bayyage Puncha or not.

When perusing the documents P-l and P-4 the only conclusion this court can reach is that the

nominations of the Petitioners and the 3rd and 4th Respondents were made on two different

occasions but, whether the inclusion of 3rd and 4th Respondents were made prior to the death of the

original permit holder or after his death is a disputed fact before this court.

This court observes that this is the main issue to be resolved before coming to any conclusion.

However the Petitioners' and the 3rd and 4th Respondents are disputing over this issue, and when

the facts are in dispute and doubtful, our courts have repeatedly refused to grant relief in the nature

of prerogative writs such as Writ of Mandamus.

In the case of Thajudeen V, Sri Lanka Tea Board and another 1981 (2) Sri LR 471 the Petitioner

and the Respondents have contested the facts which were in dispute. Ranasinghe (J) whilst

discussing this said, "A comparison of the respective positions taken up by the Respondents and

the Petitioner unmistakably shows that the claim of the Petitioner, that he is entitled to the amount

set out in his Petition, is denied by the Respondents and that such denial is not based only upon

questions of law alone. One of the main grounds of objections raised in respect of the said claim is

that the said sum of money is not, in fact, due. This objection is one based upon questions of fact.

The Respondents dispute the correctness of the figures relating to the purchases of the green tea

II !5

,

leaf. They deny that such quantities of green tea leaf were in fact purchased as claimed by the

Petitioner. The very foundations of fact, which the Petitioner must establish to prove that he is, in

fact, entitled to claim the payment of the sum of money, which he seeks to compel the

Respondents to pay him, are therefore, not only not admitted by the Respondents but are also very

strenuously denied and disputed by the Respondents. The basic of fundamental issues of fact the

proof of which is essential, to the claim for the relief the Petitioner seeks in these proceedings,

have in the first instance to be established by the Petitioner. In the absence of incontrovertible

proof or an admission by the respondents of such matters of fact, the petitioner's claim to the

payment of the said sum of money cannot be maintained. All such disputed matters of fact must

be resolved before a mandatory order, such as is claimed by the Petitioner in these

proceedings, and goes out from this court. The issuance of such an order carries with it the

implication that this Court is satisfied that the said amount is in fact due to the Petitioner and that

there is no question about the basic primary questions of fact upon which the Petitioner's claim is

founded. When, however, such questions of fact are in dispute they can and must only be settled

by a regular action between the disputants before the appropriate Court of First Instance. Such

questions, the decision of which calls for the leading of evidence, both oral and documentary and

the cross -examination of witnesses are all questions which can be best decided by way of regular

procedure falling within the ordinary jurisdiction of the Courts of First Instance.( emphasis added)

As discussed in the above case, the facts which are in dispute, namely "whether the inclusion of

3rd and 4th Respondents were made prior to the death of the original permit hold or after his

death must he resolved before a mandatory order such as is claimed by the Petitioners in the

present application are considered by this court.

The petitioners have further argued that, even if the nomination of 3rd and 4th Respondents were

made by the deceased permit holder is considered as true, such a nomination is of no force or

6

avail in Law for the reason that, once a valid nomination has been effected there is no provision

to add further nominees without first cancelling the nomination already validly made.

This court cannot agree with the above argument since there is no cancellation involved in the

permit in question and the Land Development Ordinance does not prohibit the nomination of

additional successors to a permit where nomination of successor had already being done.

For the reasons adduced above, this court IS not inclined to grant relief as prayed by the

petitioners.

Therefore application is dismissed without cost.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

H.C.J. MADAWALA.

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE CUORT OF APPEAL

Application is dismissed.

I i I I

, r !

f I t ! !

, I I I