1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA (PHC)APN 0112015

In the matter of an application for Revision in terms of Article 154 P (3) (B)ofthe Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka read with Section 5 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No.19 of

1990.

The Officer in Charge Police Station, Thirukkovil

Complainant

VS.

HC Kalmunai No. HCEPIREV/122/14 MC Pothuvil Case No. 19878IPC/14

1. Muhammed Ibrahim Abdul Rasheed, 2. Muhammadu Mustafa Razik, 3. Atham Lebbe Mufazir, 4. Seenimuhamad Muhamed Ismail, 5. Sulaimalebbe Muhamaed Uwais,

1st Party

1. Alagappa Murugan, 2. Sinnathamby Annathurai, 3. Thangarasa Poobalapillai, 4. Yogenathan Nitthiyananthan,

2nd Party

2

AND BETWEEN

1. Alagappa Murugan 2. Sinnathamby Annathurai 3. Thangarasa Poobalapillai 4. Y ogenathan Nithyananthan

2nd Party - Petitioner

VS.

The Officer in Charge Police Station Thirukkovil it,

1 st Respondent

f ,,

1. Muhammed Ibrahim Abdul

Rasheed !I2. Muhammadu Mustafa Razik ,!3. Atham Lebbe Mufazir !4. Seenimuhamad Muhamed ,![ ,Ismail

! I5. Sulaimalebbe Muhamaed

t iUwais I!1 st Party Respondent

! t

1AND NOW BETWEEN l!f!1. Muhammed Ibrahim I

t Abdul Rasheed, iiNo.191, Udaiyar Road, fAkkaraipattu ll2. Muhammadu Mustafa Razik,

,tNo.8, Beach (!Akkaraipattu. ~ ff ii,f&l

K-!r,;

3

3. Atham Lebbe Mufazir, No. 127, Jummah Mosque Road, Thakkanagar, Attalaichchenai - 16

4. Seenimuhamad Muhamed Ismail, No.37, Sub Post Office Road, Akkaraipattu 01.

5. Sulaimalebbe Muhamaed Uwais, No. 106 A, 2/3, Common Road, Akkaraipattu.

1 st Party Respondent Petitioners.

VS.

The Officer in Charge, Police Station, Thirukkovil

1 st Respondent

1. Alagappa Murugan, Kolavil - 02, Akkaraipattu.

2. Sinnathamby Annathurai Sagamam Road, Kolavil - 01, Akkaraipattu.

4

3. Thangarasa Poobalapillai

Kopal Road, Kolavil-02, Akkaraipattu.

4. Yogenathan Nithyananthan, R.K.M.Road Akkaraipattu 08.

2nd Party- Petitioner Respondents.

BEFORE: W.M.M. Malinie Gunaratne, J. and

P.R. Walgama, J.

COUNSEL: H.G. Hussain with S.A. Mohamed

for the Petitioners

D.N. Thanboo for the 2nd Respondent

P .Puvitharan for the 4th Respondent

Ravindranath. Dabare for 1 st, 3rd Respondents.

Argued on 05.05.2015

Written submissions

filed on 03.07.2015,09.07.2015 and 10.09.2015.

Decided on 17.12.2015

5

Malinie Gunaratne, J.

In this Petition the First Party -Respondent -Petitioners

(hereinafter referred to as the Petitioners) among other reliefs are seeking to

set aside the Orders dated 17.11.2014 and 01.12.2014, made by the learned

High Court Judge ofKalmunai.

The facts which led to the making of the said Order by the learned

High Court Judge are as follows:

The Petitioners are paddy farmers from the Wattumadu area in the

District of Ampara and the 2nd Party - Petitioners - Respondents (hereinafter

referred to as the Respondents) are by occupation herdsmen and they are

also from villages in the District of Ampara.

Since there was a dispute and a tense situation prevailing on 24th of

October 2014 between the Petitioners and Respondents, the Officer in

Charge of the Pothuvil Police Station, produced both parties under Section

81 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act before the learned Magistrate of

Pothuvil in Case No. 19875IPCI14 on 29th October 2014 and moved that

they be asked to show cause why they should not be bound over against

committing a breach of the peace.

Without doing so, the learned Magistrate has made an order

permitting Petitioners to cultivate the paddy lands and further ordered to

erect a fence around the paddy lands which is in dispute. Against this Order

of the learned Magistrate dated 05.11.2014 the Respondents, filed a revision

J

6

application before the Provincial High Court Holden in Kalmunai to revise

the Order of the learned Magistrate.

The learned High Court Judge after hearing the Respondents' Party

on 17.11.2014, granted an interim relief staying the Order dated 05.11.2014

of the learned Magistrate until the conclusion of the application. On 1 st

December 2014, the learned High Court Judge made another interim order

staying the entire proceedings before the Magistrate's Court of Pothuvil until

conclusion of the Revision Application.

The Petitioners have now invoked the jurisdiction of this Court to

intervene by setting aside the said Orders of the learned High Court Judge on

the circumstances mentioned in Paragraph 15 of the Petition.

In the hearing of this case, it was the contention of the learned

Counsel for the Petitioners that the learned High Court Judge had erred in

law in arriving at a definite finding of illegality of the Order of the learned

Magistrate made on 05.11.2014 without hearing the Petitioners. The learned

Counsel for the Respondents contended that the learned Magistrate has gone

beyond the limits of his powers conferred on him by Section 81 of the Code

of Criminal Procedure Act and after hearing both sides the learned High

Court Judge acted correctly in staying the proceedings before the

Magistrate's Court ofPothuvil.

Hence, now the sole question arising for decision in this case is

whether the learned High Court Judge has acted legally and reasonably when

issuing the two impugned interim orders.

It is an admitted fact by both parties that the land in question is

already declared as a forest reserve and governed by the Forest Department. tI ,

J

\I",I f

7

It is the contention of the learned Counsel for the Respondents, that an area

has been declared as a pasture land by the Government and it was allocated

only for cattle grazing and no cultivation or farming activities allowed

within the said area of land. But the learned Counsel for the Petitioners

contended, that the Petitioners are farmers engaged in paddy cultivation with

the permission from the relevant authorities, within the said area.

The learned Counsel further contended however that the

Respondents had disturbed and threatened the Petitioners preventing them

from engaging in farming activities and a tense situation prevailed. Hence,

the Officer in Charge of Pothuvil Police Station has produced both parties

filing a report under Section 81 of the Code of Criminal Procedure before

the learned Magistrate filing an application and had moved that they be

asked to show cause why they should not be bound over against committing

a beach of the peace.

Section 81 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act reads as follows:

"Whenever a Magistrate receives information that any person is

likely to commit a breach of the peace within the local limits of the

jurisdiction of the Court of such Magistrate, or that there is within such

limits a person who is likely to commit a breach of the peace or do any

wrongful act as aforesaid in any place beyond such limits the Magistrate in

any manner hereinafter provided require such person to show cause why he

should not be ordered to execute a bond with or without sureties for keeping

the peace for such period not exceeding two years as the Court thinks fit to

fix" .

t!

IlI

,-tI!i I

IIl

ttt!iiI,

I i!l

8

After the proceedings were initiated in that manner, the learned

Magistrate should follow the procedure laid down in Section 85, 86 and 87.

When a person appears or brought before a Magistrate, he shall proceed to

inquire into the truth of the information upon which he has acted and to take

such further evidence as may appear necessary. (Section 86(1)).

If upon such inquiry it is proved that it is necessary for keeping the

peace or maintaining good behaviour, that the person in respect of whom the

inquiry is made should execute a bond with or without sureties, the

Magistrate shall make an order accordingly. (Section 87).

It is significant to note that the learned Magistrate without

complying with the aforesaid procedure, has made an order, which he is not

entitled to make in an application under Section 81 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act, allowing some farmers to cultivate the land and erect a fence

around the land in dispute, governed by the Forest Department.

The learned Magistrate has erred in law making an order in regard to

the possession in this case. He cannot decide on the possession of the land

and cannot by his order permit to erect a fence round the land in dispute.

Hence, it is very clear that the learned Magistrate has gone beyond

the limits of his powers conferred on him by Section 81 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act, and not in any way contribute to the maintenance of

peace.

Hence, the VIew of the Court is, the learned High Court Judge

considering that the learned Magistrate has no power to make such an order

in an application under Section 81 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act,

has correctly granted the stay order. Accordingly, the facts stated in the

l i

II

tI

~ I

I,t !!i !II Il

~ [! !I!

9

Petition do not warrant to interfere with the order of the learned High Court

Judge.

In the above setting, I am of the view that the Petitioner's argument

is devoid of merits and should stand dismissed.

Accordingly, this petition is dismissed with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

P.R. Walgama, J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Petition is dismissed.

,

II !i; fI ! ! \ I

tI, I!

t,tt iiIIt

J

f

f1[

tIII

)

fI,