==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Orders in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus

under Article 140 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Jayawardhana Rathnayake Arachige Gamini Darmashri,

“Rukshana Hotel and Bakers”,

Petrol Shed Junction,

Pasikuda Road, Valachchenai.

CA (Writ) App. No. 741/2023

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. Divisional Secretary,

Divisional Secretariat, Koralei Pattu, Valachchenai.

2. Additional Divisional Secretary,

Divisional Secretariat, Koralei Pattu, Valachchenai.

3. District Secretary,

District Secretariat, Batticaloa.

2

4. The General Manager of Railways,

Sri Lanka Railways, Colombo 10. 5. The Secretary,

Ministry of Transport and Highways, 7th Floor, Sethsiripaya, Stage II, Battaramulla. 6. Commissioner General of Lands,

VWX8+VPM, Sri Jayawardenepura Kotte. 7. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department, Hulfsdorp, Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

Before: Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Counsel:

Thilini Vidanagamage instructed by Chamali Ranatunga for the Petitioner.

Pulina Jayasuriya, S.C. for the Respondents.

Argument on: 04.03.2026

Delivered on: 03.06.2026

3

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Judgement

Introduction

The Petitioner asserts that he is carrying on a business of a boutique and a cafe in the land in suit

(hereinafter referred to as the “premises”), which is the premises identified as Lot No. 1 of the plan

prepared by the Survey General Plan bearing No. ම ඩ/ 2/23 dated 24.05.2025, which is marked as

P1 annexed to the Petition and also part of the Magistrate record of Valachchenai bearing case No.

40543/ MISC/22 instituted against the Petitioner by the 2nd Respondent under the State Lands

(Recovery of Possession) Act, No. 7 of 1979 (as amended) (hereinafter referred to as “the Act”).

The said Magistrate’s Court case has been instituted by the 2nd Respondent in terms of the Act,

seeking the ejectment of the Petitioner; the 2nd Respondent has instituted the said proceedings

upon issuing notice, by the document marked as P4 annexed to the Petition, which the Petitioner

challenges in this Application. In addition to that, the Petitioner further challenges the entirety of

the Magistrate’s Court proceedings initiated on the application made by the 2nd Respondent marked

as P17(b).

The 1st Respondent is the Divisional Secretary of Valachchenai, while the 2nd Respondent is the

Additional Divisional Secretary of the same Division. The 3rd Respondent is the District Secretary,

under whose supervision the 1st and 2nd Respondents serves.

4

The 5th Respondent is the Secretary to the line ministry of the Railway Department, and the 6th

Respondent is the Commissioner General of Lands, while the 7th Respondent is the Honourable

Attorney General.

After supporting this Application, notice has been issued on the Respondents; though they were

all represented by the Honourable Attorney General, and several dates had been obtained

according to the records amounting to ten, they have not filed any Objections. Therefore, the matter

was fixed for Arguments without any objections.

However, at the hearing following arguments were advanced by the Counsel on either side; hence,

this judgement.

Arguments

Ms. Vidanagamage argues that the land belongs to the Railway as per the documents marked as

P23 and P23(b). In addition to that, even the documents marked P2 and P22 confirm the same.

Therefore, Ms. Vidanagamage argued that if the land belongs to the Railway authorities, the person

who can issue the quit notice is the General Manager of Railways according to the Recoveries of

State Lands Possession Act, and not the Divisional Secretary. Accordingly, the 1st Respondent or

the 2nd Respondent cannot issue such notice. Therefore, the quit notice marked as P4 is bad in law.

However, on the other hand, Mr. Jayasuriya argues that the Petitioner is guilty of laches, as the

writ notice had been given in 2022 and, without challenging it, they waited until the Magistrate’s

Court proceedings were filed after the relevant period contained in P4. In addition to that he argued

5

that the Petitioner has acquiesced by appearing before the Court and moving for time to file his

objections.

Further, he argued that there is uncertainty in the Petitioner’s case in the way it has been formulated.

However, he concedes that Lot No. 22 of P22 is the same lot as identified as Lot No. 1 of P23 and

P23(b), and that the same lot is depicted as Lot No. 1 in P2(a) and also as Lot No. 22 of P27(a).

The Petitioner’s position

The land in suit had already been identified as Lot No. 1 of the plan bearing No. A996 marked as

P2, dated as way back as 21/02/1953. The Petitioner asserts that the same parcels of land is

depicted as Lot No. 1 in P1 and Lot No. 1 of P2 overlaps. The Petitioner further asserts that the

Petitioner had taken the said land on lease from the Railway Department, whose competent

authority is the 4th Respondent.

The Petitioner marked the document issued by the Railway Department as P3(a) to elucidate that

the land belongs to the Railway Department, which is the letter dated 29.02.1972. Subsequent to

receiving P4 and P5, he has made an application under the Right to Information Act to obtain

further confirmation that the land belongs to the Railway Department, which is marked as P3(b).

The Petitioner asserts that the Petitioner received a document dated 18.03.2022, which is in Tamil;

since he was not conversant in Tamil language, he did not respond to the said letter (P4). The

Petitioner further asserts that, later, in May 2022, he received another document from the

Magistrate’s Court of Valachchenai, which was also completely in Tamil, which is marked as P5.

6

However, since it says that it is from the Court, out of respect to the courts, he has consulted an

Attorney-at-Law to ascertain exactly what it was.

He asserted that to his surprise, he came to know from the said Attorney-at-Law, that proceedings

have been instituted against him under ‘the Act’ by the 1st Respondent to evict him from the

premises under the 4th Respondent, where he now carries on the said business of his livelihood;

therefore, it is the Petitioner’s position that the 1st and 2nd Respondents cannot institute proceedings

against the Petitioner in the Magistrate’s Court of Valachchenai, to evict him.

After the Petitioner came to know, by P5, that action had been instituted by the 2nd Respondent to

evict the Petitioner from the premises, he made an application to obtain a formal lease form from

the 4th Respondent, which is marked as P6.

Accordingly, the 4th Respondent’s office informed the Petitioner, by the document dated

19.02.2022, that after exactly ascertaining the position, the 4th Respondent would inform the

Petitioner about the true position of the land. The said letter is marked as P7.

Thereafter, the 6th Respondent, by letter dated 03.10.2022, directed the 1st Respondent to send a

detailed report regarding the land in order to exactly ascertain whether it is State land or not. The

said letter is marked as P9 and a similar letter is marked as P11, and the copies thereof had also

been sent to the Petitioner.

Subsequently, there had been inter-departmental correspondence between the officials of the

Railway Department and the Land Commissioner’s Department; hence, some of the said

correspondence are marked as P10, P11, P12, and P13.

7

Thereafter, the Petitioner made an application to the Magistrate’s Court for a translation of the

entire case record, and the said application is marked as P14. After receiving the translation, the

Petitioner filed a Statement of Objections along with the relevant documents, and the said

statement is marked as P15. Thereafter, the Petitioner made certain applications under the Right

to Information Act to the 4th Respondent. The said application is marked as P16, and the replies

thereto are marked as P16(a) and P16(b).

Further, the translation of the case record of the case bearing case No. 40543/ MISC/22 Magistrate

record of Valachchenai is annexed to the Petition marked as P17(a) to P17(d). The Petitioner is

challenging, by this application, the documents marked as P17(d), which form part of the record

marked as X. Since the document P17(d) is the formal application made to the Magistrate’s Court

in terms of the Recovery of Possession Act, No. 7 of 1979.

Moreover, the Petitioner is also challenging the quit notice marked as P4. The Petitioner had

further marked, together with a separate affidavit, an additional set of documents marked as P23

to P28, without any objection being raised by the Respondents. I will refer to them when necessary

in the course of this judgement.

In view of those submissions and matters complained of and asserted by the Petitioner, though

there is no dispute, certain matters have arisen for the consideration of this Court. I will summarize

them as follows:

8

Firstly, whether the land belongs in fact to the Railway Department as asserted by the Petitioner.

Secondly, if the answer is in the affirmative to the first question, whether the 1st and 2nd

Respondents are empowered to take action under the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act.

Thirdly, if the answer is in the negative, whether the proceedings under the State Lands (Recovery

of Possession) Act initiated and instituted by the 1st and 2nd Respondents are ultra vires.

Fourthly, in those circumstances, whether the Petitioner is entitled to obtain the writs as prayed

for.

Whether the land belongs to the Railway Department or to the State

It is quite clear that the land in suit (premises) had been identified on several plans. The very first

plan is P23, which was prepared in 1922; thereafter, P22 was prepared in 1938; thereafter, the plan

prepared in 1952 marked as P2(a); and finally, the same land is depicted as Lot No. 1 in the latest

plan is marked as P1, which was prepared in 2023. For more than a century, the same land has

been identified as land belonging to the Railway Department, as depicted in the said plans as well.

Hence, it is common ground. Further, Mr. Jayasuriya also conceded that fact.

However, the 1st and 2nd Respondents have assumed that the land belongs to the State and not to

the Railway Department, and on that assumption they have acted wrongfully. In fact, there are

reports to the effect that the land belongs to the Railway Department, particularly those issued by

the Land Commissioner's Department. In fact, the same land had been acquired for the Railway

Department as far back as 1922, as reflected in the document marked P31.

9

Therefore, there is no question that the said land had been identified and depicted as land belonging

to the Railway Department for more than a century; therefore, it remains not as State land but as

land of the Railway Department, which the Petitioner had taken on an informal lease a few years

ago.

However, the issue arose after he received P4 and P5. Only thereafter did the Petitioner also

activate and make attempts to obtain a formal lease, which the Railway Department, having

ascertained from the Land Commissioners Department, had decided that the land belongs to the

Railway Department after several reports, and decided to lease out to the Petitioner as reflected in

documents attached along with further affidavits as P29 and P30.

Therefore, it is very clear that the land belongs to the Railway Department, and the 4th Respondent,

as the competent authority, after appointing a committee and complying with the said

recommendations thereof, has decided to enter into a formal lease in respect of the premises in

favour of the Petitioner. Therefore, I hold that the land belongs to the Railway Department and not

to the State.

1st and 2nd Respondents are not the competent authorities

Now, the second matter that has arisen for my consideration is whether the 1st and 2nd Respondents

are competent authorities to issue the notice marked as P4, followed by the institution of

proceedings marked as P17(b) in the Magistrate’s Court.

It is my view that since the land belongs to the Railway Department, the competent authority

cannot be the 1st and 2nd Respondents, who can be competent authorities only in respect of lands

10

belonging to the State as State land. Nevertheless, if it is Railway land, the competent authority

has to be the General Manager of Railways, as the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act

clearly indicates; therefore, it is the 4th Respondent who is the competent authority, as stipulated

in Section 18(d) of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act. For further clarity, Section 18(d)

is reproduced below;

“18. In this Act, unless “competent authority” used in relation to any land means the

Government Agent, an Additional Government Agent or an Assistant Government Agent of

the district in which the land is situated and, includes ...

(d) the General Manager of Railways; where such land is under the control of the Railway

Department.”

Further, as stipulated in Sections 3(1)(a) and (b) of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act,

a quit notice is required to be served by a “competent authority”. However, the 1st and 2nd

Respondents do not constitute a “competent authority” for the purpose of issuing a quit notice. For

further clarity, I reproduce Sections 3(1)(a) and (b) of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession)

Act below;

“3.(1) Where a competent authority is of the opinion

(a) that any land is State land; and

(b) that any person is in unauthorized possession or occupation of such land, the competent

authority may serve a notice on such person in possession or occupation thereof, or where

the competent authority considers such service impracticable or inexpedient, exhibit such

11

notice in a conspicuous place in or upon that land requiring such person to vacate such

land with his dependants, if any, and to deliver vacant possession of such land to such

competent authority or other authorized person as may be specified in the notice on or

before a specified date. The date to be specified in such notice shall be a date not less than

thirty days from the date of the issue or the exhibition of such notice.”

Accordingly, the Petitioner is not in any unauthorized possession, thus, he is authorized by the

competent authority who is the 4th Respondent.

Therefore, the documents marked as P4 is issued and based on that P17(b) was filed in

Magistrate’s Court of Valachchenai; and therefore, both are ultra vires, and even the institution of

action based on the powers under the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act is also ultra vires,

as the 1st and the 2nd Respondents have acted outside the law.

However, the 4th Respondent, after ascertaining from the Land Commissioners Department

whether the land belongs to the Railway Department or the State, formally informed the Petitioner

that the land belongs to the Railway Department and that the Railway Department can formally

lease it out to the Petitioner, thereby the Railway Department decided to lease out to the Petitioner.

Writ lies

The last question that arises for my consideration is whether the Petitioner is entitled to writs.

As mentioned above, since the land belongs to the Railway Department and the Railway

Department had decided to lease out the land to the Petitioner, and in fact the Petitioner has been

12

carrying on business in the premises having generated several employment opportunities for

people who work under him and also creating certain value-added services which in turn contribute

to the economy, the Petitioner is entitled to carry on his business as a citizen in this country.

Therefore, he is entitled to obtain relief from the Railway Department, and since the Railway

Department had decided to give the land to the Petitioner to carry on his business, the 1st and 2nd

Respondents are not empowered or entitled to do any ultra vires act, as the law does not empower

them to eject the Petitioner from the land in question.

The Petitioner has paid the due rental in millions as borne out by the document marked from P32(a)

to P32(o); therefore, the Petitioner is entitled to remain in the premises, which falls within the

purview of the 4th Respondent.

Conclusion

For the reasons adumbrated above, it is my view that the writs the Petitioner seeks lie in his favour

because even after the issuance of P9 addressed to the 1st Respondent, the 1st Respondent has still

failed to withdraw P4 and P17(b). Therefore, an order to quash should be granted, particularly in

view of the fact that no objection has been filed by the Respondents; only flimsy arguments were

advanced in that behalf such as delay, laches, and acquiescence. Therefore, heavy costs must be

ordered.

Accordingly, I grant the writs as prayed for in prayers (b) and (c) of the Petition, and I also further

direct the 1st and the 2nd Respondents to pay costs of litigation, which I estimate at Rs. 52,500/-

(Fifty-Two Thousand Five Hundred Rupees), since, being responsible officers, without

13

ascertaining the exact facts, they decided to take the Petitioner unnecessarily to Court based on

the issued ultra vires documents which are marked as P4 and P17(b). The Petitioner is entitled to

recover the said costs jointly and severally from the 1st and 2nd Respondents, who were

instrumental in issuing P4 and P17(b).

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL