Page 1 of 11

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal by way of stated case on

a question of law for the opinion of the Court of

Appeal under and in terms of Section 11A of the

Tax Appeals Commission Act No. 23 of 2011 (as

amended)

C.A Case No:

CA/TAX/01/2016

Carbotels (Private) Limited, Tax Appeals Commission No: 400, Deans Road, TAC/1T/048/2013 Colombo 10

Appellant

-Vs-

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue,

Department of Inland Revenue,

Sir Chittampalam A. Gardiner Mawatha,

Colombo 2

Respondent

Before : D.N. Samarakoon, J.

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Counsel : Dr. Shivaji Felix with Nivantha Satharasinghe for the Appellant

Manohara Jayasinghe SSC for the Respondent

Page 2 of 11

Written 07.04.2022 (by the Appellant)

Submissions : 22.04.2022 (by the Respondent)

On

Argued On : 19.01.2022

Decided On : 25.05.2022

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

The Appellant Carbotels (Private) Limited, part of the Hayleys Group, is a holding

company carrying out investments in the hotel sector. The Appellant claimed a loss of Rs.

5,018,590/- for the year of assessment 2009/2010 and the return of income submitted by the

Appellant was rejected on 28.06.2011. It was rejected because the Assessor has not allowed

the expenses arising from the dividend income. The Appellant appealed against this

determination of the Assessor to the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue (hereinafter

also referred to as the Respondent) by letter dated 11.11.2011. In the said letter the

Appellant company noted that the dividend income does not come under the total statutory

income and that the losses can be deducted under Section 25 of the Inland Revenue Act No.10

of 2006, as amended. In his determination dated 30.10.2013, the Commissioner General

increased the assessment made by the Assessor. Dissatisfied with the said determination an

appeal was made to the Tax Appeals Commission (hereinafter referred to as TAC). The

TAC, in its determination dated 16.10.2015, confirmed the determination of the Respondent.

The Case Stated consists of seven questions of law, formulated by the TAC, forwarded to

this Court by the Appellant for its opinion. These questions of law, reproduced verbatim, are

as follows:

1. Is the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue lawfully entitled to widen the scope

of an assessment and to thereby increase the amount assessed when making his

determination?

Page 3 of 11

2. Is the determination of the appeal made by the Tax Appeals Commission time barred

by operation of law?

3. Is the assessment, as confirmed by the Tax Appeals Commission, bad in law since the

Assessor who issued the notice of assessment is not the same person who made the

assessment and communicated the reasons for making the assessment?

4. Did the Tax Appeals Commission err in law by concluding that the expenses and/or

outgoings and/or deductions claimed by the Appellant and disallowed by the

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue were not lawfully permissible deductions?

5. Did the Tax Appeals Commission err in law by concluding that the Commissioner

General of Inland Revenue had computed the Appellants statutory income correctly?

6. Is the amount assessed, as confirmed by the Tax Appeals Commission excessive and

without lawful justification?

7. In view of the facts and circumstances of the case did the Tax Appeals Commission

err in law when it came to the conclusion that it did?

Question 1: Is the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue lawfully entitled to widen

the scope of an assessment and to thereby increase the amount assessed when making his

determination?

On the face of it, this question involves two considerations: whether the Respondent is

allowed to widen the scope of his assessment and whether he is allowed to increase the

amount assessed.

The determination of the Respondent includes profits on disposal of shares of two hotels

(in respect of which the share transaction levy has not been charged) which the Appellant

treated as exempt profit. On appeal to the TAC, the Appellant objected to this inclusion on

the basis that the Respondent is time-barred, by virtue of Section 163(5) of the Inland

Revenue Act, from assessing this additional source of income. The Appellant argued that

what the Respondent did was in fact make a fresh assessment, and thereby exceed his

statutory remit, in respect of un-assessed receipts which the initial Assessor had not taken

into consideration. Neither the notice of assessment nor the letter of intimation sent by the

Assessor refers to the taxability of the profit arising on the disposal of shares.

The Respondent contended that he had a statutory duty cast on him to ensure collection

of the true amount of taxes owed by taxpayers and argued that he was merely increasing

Page 4 of 11

the assessment as per Section 165(13) of the Inland Revenue Act. The TAC agreed with this

contention.

The jurisdiction of the Respondent when an appeal is made to him is clearly demarcated

by Section 165(13) of the Inland Revenue Act. This Section reads as,

In determining an appeal under this section, the Commissioner General may confirm,

reduce, increase or annul the assessment appealed against and shall give notice in writing to

the appellant, of his determination on the appeal. [emphasis added]

In the instant case, the Respondent has widened the scope of his assessment by varying

the contours of the Assessors assessment by assessing previously unassessed receipts. It is

not a mere increase in the quantum assessed, such an increase being within his jurisdiction.

Further, by this variation of the contours of the assessment and making what amounts

to a fresh assessment, the Respondent is not in compliance with the time limit set out by the

legislature in Section 163(5) of the Inland Revenue Act. Section 163(5) requires the filing of

return to be done on or before the thirtieth day of November immediately succeeding the end

of that year of assessment and the assessment having to be done before the expiry of two

years from the end of that year of assessment. The Act is explicit in stating that no

assessment of the income tax payable shall be made after the said period. The fresh

assessment of profits on disposal of shares is thereby out of time.

Thus, this Court is of the view that the Respondent is not entitled to widen the scope of

his assessment, beyond the initial assessment undertaken by the Assessor. In the instant

case, it was not a mere increase as envisaged in Section 165(13) of the Act, the increase was

owing to the said fresh assessment. Further, the fresh assessment was not possible because

of the statutory time bar found in Section 163(5). This is not to say that it is possible for the

Respondent to widen his scope of assessment if it fell within the time period.

On the other hand, if we presume the Assessee had not appealed the decision of the

Assessor then the question arises whether the Commissioner General can make a fresh

assessment of his own volition? The answer to this must be an emphatic no.

Question 2: Is the determination of the appeal made by the Tax Appeals Commission

time-barred by operation of law?

Page 5 of 11

The Appellant argues that the determination of the TAC dated 16.10.2015, is time-barred

by operation of law since Section 10 of the Tax Appeals Commission Act No. 23 of 2011, as

amended, requires the Commission to hear and determine appeals made to it within two

hundred and seventy days from the date of the commencement of its sittings for the hearing

of such appeal. (The first oral hearing in the instant case took place on 19.06.2014). Further,

upon a consideration of the several amendments made to the Tax Appeals Commission Act,

the time limit granted to the TAC to make a determination is mandatory and requires strict

compliance.

The TAC in its determination explained the reasons for the delay in making its

determination, which included the untimely demise of the Chairman of the Commission and

changes in the membership of the Commission.

Nonetheless, it has been established by a series of decisions of this Court that the time

limit spelled out in Section 10 is not a mandatory provision. (See CIC Agri Business (Private)

Limited v. The Commissioner General of Inland Revenue, CA Tax 42/2014 decided on

29.05.2020, Kegalle Plantations PLC v. Commissioner General of Inland Revenue, CA Tax

09/2017 decided on 04.09.2018)

Question 3: Is the assessment, as confirmed by the Tax Appeals Commission, bad in law

since the Assessor who issued the notice of assessment is not the same person who made the

assessment and communicated the reasons for making the assessment?

The Appellant contends that the Assessor who issued the letter of intimation setting out

the reasons for assessment (one J.M.S.S. Ratnawardhna, Assessor, Unit 10) is not the same

Assessor who sent out the notice of assessment as the notice of assessment bears the frank

of one G.A.O. Jayawansa, Senior Assessor, Unit 10. It was argued that by virtue of Section

163(3) of the Inland Revenue Act read together with Section 164 of the same, the Assessor

who issues the notice of assessment and the Assessor communicating the reasons for non-

acceptance should be one and the same person. The TAC rejected this contention.

It is manifest that a duty is imposed on an Assessor not only to give reasons for non-

acceptance of a return but also to communicate them to the Assessee (vide D.M.S. Fernando

v. Ismail [1982] 1 SLR 222). The rationale was elucidated in the clearest of terms by His

Lordship Samarakoon C.J. in the same case.

Page 6 of 11

Under the law that existed at the time, the Assessor was not bound to disclose any

reasons either on the file or by communication to the Assessee. The Assessee could only

appeal against the quantum of assessment and the onus of proof lay on the Assessee. He

could only speculate on the reasons for such assessment for the purposes of his appeal. The

picture is now different.

The primary purpose of the amending legislation is to ensure that the Assessor will bring

his mind to bear on the return and come to a definite determination whether or not to accept

it. It was intended to prevent arbitrary and grossly unfair assessments which many Assessors

had been making as a protective measure". An unfortunate practice had developed where

some Assessors, due to pressure of work and other reasons, tended to delay looking at a

return till the last moment and then without a proper scrutiny of the return, made a grossly

exaggerated assessment. Under the amendment when an Assessor does not accept a

return, it must mean that at the relevant point of time he has brought his mind to bear on

the return and has come to a decision on rejecting the return. Consequent to this rejection,

the reasons must be communicated to the Assessee. [emphasis added]

In the instant case, communication of the reasons of the Assessor has taken place albeit

the notice of assessment is not issued by the same Assessor who made the assessment and

communicated his reasons for the same. However, when the purpose of this practice is

observed, it is clear that in the instant case, the Assessor, one J.M.S.S. Ratnawardhna, has

done what was required of him by giving his mind to the return and making a definite

determination not to accept it. He has communicated his reasons for arriving at his decision

to the Appellant. No prejudice could be said to have been caused to the Appellant.

Therefore, we hold that merely because the Assessor who issued the notice of assessment

is not the same Assessor who made the assessment and communicated the reasons for

making the assessment, the Assessment is not bad in law.

Question 4: Did the Tax Appeals Commission err in law by concluding that the expenses

and/or outgoings and/or deductions claimed by the Appellant and disallowed by the

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue were not lawfully permissible deductions?

Page 7 of 11

Question 5: Did the Tax Appeals Commission err in law by concluding that the

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue had computed the Appellants statutory income

correctly?

Questions 4 and 5 will be answered together.

In the instant case, the Appellant declared the dividend income under Section 3(e) of the

Inland Revenue Act and excluded it from its total statutory income under Section 63(d) of the

same after deducting the relevant expenses under Section 25. The Assessor agreed that this

income must be categorized under Section 3(e) but did not allow this deduction. At the appeal,

the Respondent determined, according to the nature of the business of the Appellant, that

dividend income would exclusively come under Section 3(a) of the Act since the said dividend

income is received as part of the business income of the Appellant and not as an isolated

source of income (passive income) other than its business income and allowed for the

necessary deductions of expenses incurred in the production of that income. The reason given

was that the Appellant invests its money in shares. The Respondent relied on the case of

Ceylon Financial Investments v. Commissioner of Income Tax 43 NLR 1 in order to

substantiate his position.

Further, the said dividend income cannot be considered in terms of Section 63(d) and the

expenses incurred in production can be deducted as per Sections 25 and 26 of the Act.

This Court has to consider whether the Respondent has correctly identified whether the

dividend income in question can be categorized under Section 3(a) and whether the

Appellant, in fact, carries out a business.

In the case of Ceylon Financial Investments (supra), decided in 1941, His Lordship

Howard C.J. referred to the following judgments to determine that the company whose

income was derived from dividends declared by companies in which it owned shares, was in

fact a business.

In Commissioners of Inland Revenue v. the Korean Syndicate 12 T.C. 181, Atkin L.J.

held,

For I see nothing to prevent a holding Company, which a very well-known method of

doing business in these days, from carrying on a business.

Page 8 of 11

His Lordship also referred to the following passage from Lord Sterndale M.R.s judgment

as well.

An individual comes into existence for many purposes, or perhaps sometimes for none,

whereas a limited Company comes into existence for some particular purpose of carrying out

a transaction by getting possession of concessions and turning them to account, then that is

a matter to be considered when you come to decide whether doing that is carrying on a

business or not.

In Commissioners of Inland Revenue v. The Westleigh Estates Co. Ltd., The South Behar

Railway Co. Ltd., The Eccentric Club Ltd., 12 T.C.657, Lord Sumner held,

It is obvious that the Companys objects have by no means been accomplished. It is

obvious, too, that during its present period of dormant life it has very little to do. I do not

attach much importance to the domestic operations of declaring and paying dividends,

remunerating directors and presenting reports, but the operation of receiving and thus

discharging the annuity payments goes on continuously, and however simple, it is not a mere

passive acquiescence. It is the transaction of business between debtor and creditor resulting

periodically in the discharge of a debt. The present is not the case of a company existing to

do one act only and once and for all. Not only did the company make the agreement of 1906,

but it plays its recurring part in every payment and receipt of gains, and there is here,

therefore, that repetition of acts, which Lord Justice Brett says is implied in carrying on

business .

Having referred to these judgments, His Lordship Howard C.J. held,

Applying the principles laid down in the English cases which I have cited there can be

no doubt that the appellant company, though functioning as an Investment Company only

for which purpose it came into existence, has not accomplished its purpose and was carrying

on business. I am, therefore, of the opinion that the income derived by the appellant company

from dividends and interest fall within the words profits from any business under Section

6 (1) (a)[of the old Act]

His Lordship Keuneman J. arrived at the same conclusion when His Lordship held,

But it is manifest that its objects have not been accomplished and although at present it

carries on a passive or dormant life, it has not ceased to carry on business. The operation

Page 9 of 11

of receiving and discharging the debts due to it is regularly repeated. In fact, it carries on

business in the way that a holding company carries on business.

It is therefore clear that the business carried on by the Appellant company, can in fact be

deemed to be a business, and the dividend income can be categorized under Section 3(a).

The Appellant too, in its written and oral submissions, agrees that since it is essentially a

holding company which invests in subsidiaries and associate companies, dividends received

by it come within the scope of Section 3(a).

In fact, Justice Akbar in The Commissioner of Income Tax v. Arunachalam Chettiar 37

NLR 145, was of the view that discretion is vested in the Crown to elect whether it will charge

under paragraph (a) or (e).

If, it is so categorized, the particular income forms part of the statutory income. Then it

is not a passive income. It loses the character of passive income and under Sections 25 and

26 that income can be taxable.

His Lordship Keuneman J. in his judgment made the following observation in this regard,

If then the business of an individual or a company consists in the receipt of dividends,

interest or discounts alone, or if the business of receiving dividends, interest or discounts can

be clearly separated from the rest of the trade or business, then any special provisions

applicable to dividends, interest or discount must be applied.

The above interpretation has now been given a statutory footing, by virtue of the

amendments introduced in 2014 and 2015, to Section 63, which at the argument stage, this

Court brought to the attention of the learned Counsel. This Section reproduced for the

purpose of convenience, reads as follows,

Where a dividend is paid by any resident company to any resident or non-resident

company, and either

(a) a deduction has been made under section 65 in respect of that dividend by the first

mentioned resident company;

(b) that dividend is exempt from income tax under section 10;

Page 10 of 11

(c) such dividend consists of any part of the amount of a dividend received by the first-

mentioned resident company from another resident company; or

(d) such dividend is a dividend declared by a quoted public company, profits and income from

such dividend shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any other provision of this

Act, be deemed not to form part of the total statutory income of the second mentioned

company.

For the purpose of this section the profits and income from such dividends which form

part of the profits under section 3(a) of this Act, means profits and income after deducting

expenses in ascertaining the profits from such business of receiving dividends.

Therefore, we hold that both the Respondent and the TAC correctly identified that the

dividend constituted part of the statutory income and allowed the deduction of expenses.

It is true that originally the Legislature was of the view that Section 63 exemption

applied only to dividend income within Section 3(e) But there was an amendment to the effect

that if dividend income falls under Section 3(a) then expenses are deductible when

determining assessable income.

When considering the material before it, this Court observes that throughout the

Appellant wanted to claim the benefit of Section 63(d), by categorizing it under Section 3(e),

but to have the expenses incurred in the production of that dividend income to be deducted

from their income, which derived from the dividend income. The conduct of the Appellant is

an example of the proverb that you cannot have the cake and eat it too.

Question 6: Is the amount assessed, as confirmed by the Tax Appeals Commission

excessive and without lawful justification?

Question 7: In view of the facts and circumstances of the case did the Tax Appeals

Commission err in law when it came to the conclusion that it did?

In view of the opinion of this Court set out above, we hold that questions 6 and 7 must

be answered in favour of the Appellant. The Respondents assessment is excessive and

without lawful justification, and therefore the TAC erred in law when it reached the same

conclusion.

Page 11 of 11

Therefore, having answered questions 1, 6, and 7 in favour of the Appellant, we remit

the case record to the TAC under Section 11(A)(6) of the TAC Act to revise the assessment

according to the opinion of this Court.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D.N. SAMARAKOON, J.

I AGREE

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL