1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

CNWRIT/ 92/2014

Board of Review Appeal No 2746

CHP File No. CH/O/1033

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for a mandate in

the nature of Writ of Certiorari, Prohibition and

Mandamus under article 140 of the Constitution

of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka

Mr. R.B.L.E. Wijesuriya,

No. 43-2/2, Gregory's Road,

Colombo 07.

Vs,

1. Mr. Raja Goonaratne,

PETITIONER

Commissioner for National Housing,

National Housing Department,

Sethsiripaya,

Battaramulla.

RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT

lA. Dr. W.M. Karunadasa,

Commissioner for National Housing,

National Housing Department,

Sethsiripaya,

Battaramulla.

ADDED RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT

2. Mr. O.RJansen (Chairman)

3. Miss R.Y.Amarasinghe

II

I

i I

2

4. Mr. J .M. Bandara

5. Mr. W.N.R.P. Wijepala

All being members of the Ceiling Housing

Property Board of Review,

No. 10, Sri Vipulasena Mw,

Colombo 10 ..

And now,

Rohan Ajith Senanayake,

No. 96/5,

Kithulwatte Road,

Colombo 08.

RESPONDENTS

INTERVENIENT - PETITIONER

Vs,

Mr. R.B.L.E. Wijesuriya,

No. 43-2/2, Gregory's Road,

Colombo 07.

PETITIONER- RESPONDENT

1. Mr. Raja Goonaratne,

Commissioner for National Housing,

National Housing Department,

Sethsiripaya,

Battaramulla.

RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT

II

i ! I ,

Ij

i

1A. Dr. W.M. Karunadasa,

Commissioner for National Housing,

National Housing Department,

Sethsiripaya,

Battaramulla.

ADDED RESPONDENT -RESPONDENT -RESPONDENT

1. Mr. O.RJansen (Chairman)

2. Miss R. Y .Amarasinghe

3. Mr. J.M. Bandara

4. Mr. W.N.R.P. Wijepala

3

All being members of the Ceiling Housing

Property Board of Review,

Before: Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J (PICA) &

H.C.J. Madawala J

No. 10, Sri Vipulasena Mw,

Colombo 10.

RESPONDENTS-RESPONDENTS

Counsel: K. Sri Gunawardane with C.Ladduwahetty for the Petitioner-Respondent

Avindra Rodrigo with Akiel Deen and Shamalie Jayathunge

for the Intervenient-Petitioner

Chaya Sri Nammuni with Champika Laduwahetti for the Respondent-Respondents

Support for Intervention On: 14.09.2015

Written Submissions On: 05.10.2015

Order On: 11.12.2015

i I i i i

~-

1 f

.f t ! j

4

Order

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J (PICA)

Petitioner -Respondent R.B.L.E Wijesuriya has come before this court seeking inter alia,

b. Grant and issue a mandate in the nature of Writ of Certiorari quashing the order of the

(Board of Review in Appeal NO.2746 (X-lO) and the decisions embodied in documents

marked X-6 and X-6 (a) send to the Petitioner by the 1st Respondent.

c. Grant and issue a Writ of Mandamus directing the 1st Respondent to grant permission to

the Petitioner in terms of section 17C of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law to sell

and dispose premises bearing Assessment No. 43-2/2 Gregory's Road, Colombo 07.

The Petitioner has made the Commissioner of National Housing as the 1st Respondent to the present

applicationand the members of the Ceiling on Housing Property Board of Review as 2-5 Respondents

to the application. The Application was supported for notices on 16.05.2014 and the court made order

issuing notices on all the Respondents on that day. Since then this case has gone down for several days

for objections of the said Respondents. On 26.05.2015 papers were filed before this court by Rohan

Ajith Senanayake for intervention to the present application. Since the Petitioner-Respondent has

objected for the above intervention this court decided to inquire into the said application for

intervention.

The position taken up by the Intervenient- Petitioner before this court was that the Petitioner-

Respondent had willfully suppressed the existence and/or the contents of Court of Appeal Writ

Application No.81/ 2013 which concerns the identical premises that forms the subject matter of the

present Writ application and therefore the Intervenient -Petitioner is a necessary party to the present

application.

f i I

5

Intervenient -Petitioner has further submitted before this court that he was the owner of the premises

bearing Assessment No. 43-2/2 Gregory's Road, Colombo 07 prior to its vesting in the Commissioner

of National Housing by operation of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law No.1 of 1973. Several years

later the said property was transferred in the name of the Petitioner- Respondent by the 1st Respondent-

Respondent on 2nd January 2012. Against the said transfer the Intervenient-Petitioner filed a Court of

Appeal Writ Application No. 81/2013 challenging the said transfer praying inter alia,

I. A Writ of Certiorari quashing the transfer of the Premises No. 43-2/2

Gregory's Road, Colombo 07 from the Commissioner of National

Housing to the 3rd Respondent (Petitioner-Respondent to the present

application).

II. A Writ of Mandamus directing the 1st Respondent to divest the Premises

No 43-2/2 Gregory's Road, Colombo 07 to the Petitioner (Intervenient-

Petitioner to the present application).

In view of the above submission, the Intervenient- Petitioner has taken up the position that the

Petitioner -Respondent to the present application was under a clear duty to disclose the existence

and/or the contents of the said application and the said willful suppression warrants dismissal of the

present application in limine or permitted the Intervenient-Petitioner to intervene in the present

application since he is a necessary party to this action.

Whilst objecting the intervention by the Intervenient - Petitioner, the Petitioner-Respondent submitted

that when the Ceiling on Housing Property Law No 1 of 1973 came in to operation the Premises No.

43- 212 Gregory's Road, Colombo 07 become vested in the 1st Respondent-Respondent as an excess

house of the Intervenient - Petitioner. The Petitioner-Respondent who was the tenant of the said

premises at that time had signed an agreement to purchase the said property.

t I f It t; t II

~ f

f

f ! I I

6

However on representation made by the said Intervenient-Petitioner to the 1st Respondent -Respondent,

the said premises were divested on him on or around 05.08.1985. Being dissatisfied with the said

decision to divest the property in question, the Petitioner -Respondent had come before the Court of

Appeal and by its order dated 11.02.2003 the Court of Appeal quashed the said divesting order. The

Intervenient-Petitioner then appealed to the Supreme Court against the said decision and the Supreme

Court by Judgment dated 29.01.2009 affirmed the Judgment of the Court of Appeal. According to the

Petitioner-Respondent the 1st Respondent-Respondent had taken 3 years thereafter, and finally on

02.07.2012 a transfer deed was executed in favour of the Petitioner-Respondent. With the said deed of

transfer the Petitioner-Respondent had become the owner of the Premises No 43 2/2, Gregory Road,

Colombo 07.

According to the Petitioner-Respondent, thereafter on 28.11.2012 he has made an application under

section 17 ( c) of the said Act, seeking permission from the 1st Respondent -Respondent to sell the said

property. However the 1 st Respondent-Respondent had turned down the said application and the

Petitioner-Respondent had appealed against the said order of refusal to the 2nd to 5th Respondent-

Respondents who functioned as Ceiling on Housing Property Board of Review. The said board by its

order dated 215t January 2014, refused the appeal and the Petitioner-Respondent had filed the present

application before this court against the said decision of the 2nd to 5th Respondents seeking inter alia, to

issue a Writ of Certiorari to quash the said decision and a Writ of Mandamus directing the 1st

Respondent -Respondent to grant permission under section 17 (c) of the Ceiling on Housing Property

Law to sell and dispose the said property.

The court observes at this stage that the Petitioner-Respondent is the lawful owner of the Premises

bearing No. 43 2/2 Gregory Road, Colombo 07 after the execution of the transfer deed by the lSI

Respondent-Respondent on 02.07.2012. The question of ownership of this property is not an issue

before this court and the question before this court is the validity of the Order made by the 2nd to 5th

Respondents in their capacity as members of the Ceiling on Housing Property Board of Review. If the

7

Intervenient -Petitioner intends to challenge the deed of transfer executed by the 1st Respondent-

Respondent, his cause of action is not before this court and therefore the Petitioner- Respondent is not

guilty of concealing material facts before this court, for the reason that the Intervenient-Petitioner

seized to be the owner of the said property after the decision of the Supreme Court confirming the

decision of the Court of Appeal to quash the divesting order dated 05.08.1985. As referred by me in

this order the question before us is only to decide the validity of the order dated 21.01.2014 and the

Intervenient - Petitioner is not a necessary party to reach a decision on the matter before this court.

In the case of L.U.P. Jayawardena V. Minister of Health and Others lCA Writ Application No.

978/2008- CA minutes of21.05.2009] the Court of Appeal held that;

"What the court at this point of time need to consider is whether the intervenient party is a

necessary party and having such party in the case would in all circumstances assist court in

considering the merits and demerits of the application before court."

Having gone through the material placed by all the parties, I am of the view that Intervenient -

Petitioner is not a necessary party for the present application before this court and also conclude that his

presence to the present application will not assist the consideration of the present application before us.

Therefore I decide to dismiss the application by the Intervenient-Petitioner to intervene in this

application Intervention is Refused.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

H.C.J. Madawala J

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE CUORT OF APPEAL

~

I,

II,

I

I I I

f ,