IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Nissanga Achchi Appuhamilage

Nandawathi Nissanga,

No. 145/4,

Borukgamuwa,

Pallewela.

Petitioner

CASE NO: CA/WRIT/334/2016

Vs.

Commissioner of Title Settlement,

Department of Land Settlement,

No. 1200/6,

Mihikatha Medura,

Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

And 5 Others

Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Ravindra Sumathipala for the Petitioner.

Chaya Sri Nammuni, S.S.C. for the 1st-3rd

Respondents.

Decided on: 29.07.2019

2

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The petitioner filed this application on 03.10.2016 seeking to

quash by way of writ of certiorari the Determination of the

Commissioner of Title Settlement (the 1st Respondent) made under

section 14 of the Registration of Title Act, No. 21 of 1998, which

was published in the Gazette marked P5 dated 06.01.2011, and

the Certificate of Title issued by the Registrar of Title under section

37 of the Act marked P4 dated 20.05.2011 certifying that the

petitioner has First Class Title of Absolute Ownership to the land

described in the said Certificate. The petitioner also seeks to

quash by way of certiorari the determinations made and the

Certificates of Title issued in favour of the 4th-6th respondents.

It is the position of the petitioner that the title of the petitioner,

and the 4th-6th respondents derives from the same source and

therefore he filed a partition action in the District Court to put an

end to the co-ownership among them. In that partition action the

4th-6th respondents have taken up an objection to the

maintainability of the action under the provisions of the

Registration of Title Act.

Section 32 of the Registration of Title Act reads as follows:

32(1) The registration of a person with a First Class Title of

Absolute Ownership to a land parcel, shall vest in that person

absolute ownership of such land parcel together with all rights

and privileges belonging or appurtenant thereto, subject to

any subsisting interests as registered in the Encumbrances

Section of the Title Register.

3

Section 33 of the Act reads as follows:

33(1) Entries in the Title Register maintained under the

provisions of this Act, shall be conclusive evidence of the

existence of the ownership or interest specified in such entries

and shall not be questioned in a Court of law except as

provided for in this Act.

(2) The interests of a person whose name appears in the Title

Register may be assailed only as provided for in this Act, and

shall be held by such person together with all rights and

privileges belonging or appurtenant thereto free from all

interests and claims other than those appearing in the Title

Register.

Under section 37 of the Act, which is quoted below, Certificate of

Title shall form conclusive evidence of the title.

37(1) Any person, having a Title of Ownership or other interest

in a land parcel registered under this Act, may on payment of

the prescribed fee, obtain a Certificate of Title in respect of

such Ownership or interest, from the appropriate Registrar of

Title.

(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, such Certificate of Title

shall form conclusive evidence of the title to such interest.

Section 63 of the Act is to the following effect.

The Partition Act shall not apply to land parcels registered

under this Act with a First Class Title of Absolute Ownership,

or Second Class Title of Ownership.

4

It is in that context, the petitioner has filed this application whilst

making an application to lay by the partition action.

The petitioner filed this application on the premise that she was

taken by complete surprise when it was revealed in the District

Court that, in respect of the subject land, actions have been taken

by the Commissioner of Title Settlement under the Registration of

Title Act. In paragraph 18 of the petition the petitioner stated that

when she became aware of the above said facts, she was shocked

and a fraud had been perpetrated by the 1st to 3rd respondents at

the instigation of the 4th respondent in the whole process of issuing

First Class Title. In paragraph 19 she further stated that during

the material period she was resident in Kurunagala from 1995

until 2011.

The grievance of the petitioner is that the petitioner and the 4th-6th

respondents each should have got 23 perches, but the 1st

respondent has given 39.8 perches to the 4th respondent, 16.8

perches to the 5th respondent, 19.1 perches to the 6th respondent

and 16.4 perches to the petitioner. Not only the 4th respondent but

also the 5th and 6th respondents seek dismissal of the petitioners

action.

The petitioner admits that the Act provides for an appeal procedure

to a claimant against an order made by the Commissioner of Title

Settlement under section 14 of the Act. The petitioner mainly

challenges the order made by the Commissioner of Title Settlement

under section 14 of the Act.

Section 22 of the Act reads as follows:

5

Any claimant aggrieved by any Declaration of the

Commissioner of Title Settlement under section 14 may prefer

an appeal against such declaration within the prescribed

period to the District Court having jurisdiction over the area

where the land parcel is situate.

Sections 24-26 inter alia deal with the procedure to be adopted and

the orders which could be made by the District Court.

The petitioner in paragraph 24 of the petition says that she could

not appeal against the determination of the 1st respondent as she

was not a claimant before the 1st respondent.

However this assertion was proved to be false by the 1st respondent

by tendering documents marked 1R1 and 1R2 with the statement

of objections. Those two documents prove that the petitioner was

a claimant before the 1st respondent and there had been an inquiry

on that claim on 23.02.2010. At that inquiry the petitioner has

admitted that her claim is now restricted to 16.4 perches.

The petitioner did not file counter affidavit against the said

statement of objections of the 1st respondent. The counsel for the

petitioner returned the brief to the petitioner and the petitioner

had to retain a new counsel.

It is clear that the petitioner cannot maintain this action. Her

application shall fail inter alia on suppression or distortion of

material facts. When the Registration of Title Act, which is a

Special Act, provides for the appeal procedure against the

impugned determination of the 1st respondent, the petitioner

cannot ignore the appeal procedure and come before this Court

6

more than five years after that order canvassing the same invoking

the writ jurisdiction of this Court. There is no jurisdictional issue

as the new counsel for the petitioner purports to suggest.

I refuse the application of the petitioner with costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal