1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

CNWRIT/480/2015 Vs,

In the matter of an Application for a mandate

in the nature of Writ of Certiorari and

Mandamus under article 140 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka

Chamath Kavintha Gunawardena

Appearing by his next friend

Patrick Milton Gunawardena

National Housing Scheme,

Serpentine Road, Borella,

Colombo 08.

1. 1.H.M.W. Ranjith,

Principal,

Nalanda College,

Colombo 10.

2. P.N.Ilepperuma,

PETITIONER

Director of Education for the National Schools,

Ministry of Education,

'Isurupaya'

Battaramulla.

3. W.M. Bandusena,

Secretary,

Ministry of Education,

'Isurupaya'

Battaramulla.

RESPONDENTS

Before:

Counsel:

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J (PICA) &

S. Thurairaja PC J

Manohara de. Silva PC with Hirosha Munasinghe for the Petitioner

M. Jayasinghe SC for the Respondents

Argued on: 01.12.2016, 06.12.2016

Judgment on: 20.01.2017

Order

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J

2

Petitioner to the present application Chamath Kavintha Gunawardena appearing by his next friend

Patrick Milton Gunawardena had come before this court seeking for the grant and issue writs in the

nature of Certiorari and Mandamus in order to,

a) Quash the decision contained in the letter dated 20.07.2015 marked 'P-20' and letter dated

26.10.2015 marked 'P-29' of the 2nd Respondent.

b) Compelling the 151 to 3rd Respondents to perform the public duty cast on them and to admit

the Petitioner to year one of Nalanda College Colombo for the current year 2015 or in an

alternative to admit the Petitioner to year two in the year 2016 or other according to law

c) Directing the 2nd Respondent to act according to the letter marked P-22 dated 07.08.2015

which was issued by the 2nd Respondent and to admit the Petitioner to year one of the

Nalanda College Colombo for the current year 2015

Petitioner who had submitted an application to gain admission to Nalanda College Colombo through

his father (Next Friend to the present application) and mother had submitted before this court that,

3

a) Applications were called in June 2014 for admission of students for Government Schools

by circular 23/2013 dated 18.06.2014

b) An application was submitted to Nalanda College Colombo under the category of

Residence in close proximity in accordance with the above circular by the next friend

Patrick Milton Gunawardena

c) Petitioner was called for an interview on 26th August 2014

d) Next Friend and the Mother of the Petitioner attend the said interview with the Petitioner

e) Before going through any document carried by the next friend on behalf of the Petitioner,

the 151 Respondent requested the Next Friend to submit his School Leaving Certificate

f) The 151 Respondent who went through the said leaving certificate had informed the next

friend that, "according to the school leaving certificate of the next friend, the religion of the

next friend is Christian and Nalanda College being a Buddhist School the Petitioner cannot

be admitted and returned the school leaving certificate

g) Even though the next friend had clarified the religion appeared in his leaving certificate the

151 Respondent did not change his decision and was not prepared to hold the interview to

consider the other eligibility criterion of the Petitioner and the interview was concluded

When the request made by the next friend on behalf of the Petitioner to allow the Petitioner to face the

interview was rejected by the 151 Respondent, the next friend who was aggrieved by the said decision

had appealed to the 151 Respondent twice, by letter dated 01.09.2014 (P-3) and 18.09.2014 (P-4) but

was not received any response from the lSI Respondent.

As observed by this court the next friend of the Petitioner was not possessed with any material to

establish his religion when he was confronted with his school leaving certificate at the interview by the

151 Respondent, but when he appealed by P-3 and P-4 to the principle he had placed proof to establish

his religion but the 151 Respondent had failed to consider the said material and inform his decision to

the next friend to the Petitioner.

4

However with regard to the decision taken by the 151 Respondent at the said interview, the said

Respondent had taken up the following position before this court,

"The policy of Nalanda College is to restrict admission only to Buddhists. A non- Buddhist

will be eliminated from the admission process at the earliest stage. In implementing this policy

Nalanda College has resolved upon a criterion for determining the religion of an intended

student. In terms of this criterion the religion of the child is deemed to be the religion of the

father as reflected in the father's school leaving certificate with it transpiring that the

Petitioner's next friend's leaving certificated his religion as 'Christian' the authorities were left

with no choice than to refuse admission to the Petitioner"

As submitted by the 1st Respondent the only criterion adopted by Nalanda College to decide the

religion of the student is the religion of the father appeared in the school leaving certificate. If the

father had not attended a school, question arises as to how the school will decide the religion of the

student, even if the student had fulfilled all the other requirements to get selected to Nalanda College,

since establishing the religion of the student as Buddhist is the main factor in selection criterion. When

the next friend of the Petitioner wrote to the lSI Respondent P-3 and P-4, he placed several material

before the lSI Respondent to prove his religion including,

a) A letter from Borelle Athula Nayaka Thero to confirm that the members of the Petitioner's

family are Dayakaya's of the Buddhist Temple in Chandraleka Mawatha Borella

b) Photographs to confirm the last rituals of the Petitioner's grandfather (next friend's father)

was conducted under the Buddhist Customs.

c) A letter to confirm that the Petitioner's eldest sister Upada Devmini Gunawardena is

following Buddhism as a Buddhist student at Yashodara Balika Vidyalaya Borella

,

f

I

!,11[I

I

!frI!f!!tf I~

~ !

II

t

J

5

d) The marriage certificate under the General Marriages Ordinance to establish that the

marriage between the next friend and Petitioner's mother was not registered at a Catholic

Church

e) A document to establish that, the son of the eldest brother of the next friend, Pasindu

Bawantha Gunawardena is studying at Nalanda College in grade 4B as a Buddhist Student

f) An affidavit signed by the next friend on 25.06. 1997 when the next friend submitted

papers before the Supreme Court to take oath as an Attorney at Law

but the position taken up by the 151 Respondent before this court was that, non of those

materials were useful for the 151 Respondent since the sole criterion of Nalanda College to decide the

religion of the student was the school leaving certificate of the father.

When considering the above position taken by the Respondents it comes to our mind Lord

Diplock's exposition of the principles of Judicial review in Council of Civil Service Union V.

Minister for the Civil Service [1985J AC 374 at 408 where Lord Diplock had observed,

"By 'irrationality' I mean what can by now be succinctly referred to a 'Wednesbury

unreasonableness' (Association Provincial Picture House Ltd V. Wednesbury Corporation

[1948J 1 KB 223). It applies to a decision which is so outrageous in its defiance of logic or of

accepted moral standards that no sensible person who had applied his mind to the question to

be decided could have arrived at it. Whether a decision falls within this category is a question

that judges by their training and experience should be well equipped to answer, or else there

would be something badly wrong with our judicial system. To justify the court's exercise of

this role resort I think is today no longer needed to viscount Radcliffe's ingenious explanation

in Edwards V. Bairstow [1956J AC 14 of irrationality as a ground for a court's reversal of a

decision by ascribing it to an inferred unidentifiable mistake of law by the decision maker.

~

~

~ ! rIi i I

f; t, I

iI

~ {

,

f

\

t

6

Irrationality by now can stand upon its own feet as an accepted ground on which decision may

be attached by judicial review.

I have described the third head as 'procedural impropriety' rather than failure to observe basic

rules of Natural Justice or failure to act with procedural fairness towards the person who will

be affected by the decision."

As revealed before this court the circular applicable to school admission to year one 2015, circular

23/2013 has identified certain criterion and category of residence in close proximity is one such

criterion identified in the said circular. However there is no guide line given in the said circular for the

identification of the religion of an applicant but under section 3.2 of the said circular the government

schools are bound to maintain the same student percentage as at 1961 when the schools were vested

with the government and this factor has been accepted both by the Supreme Court as well as by the

Court of Appeal when considering applications for school admission.

In the absence of an accepted criterion for the identification of the religion of an applicant, the school

authorities are bound to consider the material placed before them and reach a fair conclusion. They

cannot be unreasonable to the applicant who comes before them.

When discussing the term unreasonableness the famous case of Associated Provincial Picture House

Ltd V. Wednesbury Corporation [1948]1 KB 233 Lord Gree MR expounded it as follows,

"It is true that discretion must be exercised reasonably Now what does that mean? Lawyers

familiar with the phraseology used in relation to exercise of statutory discretion often used the

word 'unreasonable' in a rather comprehensiYe sense. It has frequently been used and is

frequently used as a general description of the things that must not be done. For instance a

person entrusted with discretion must, so to speak, direct himself property in-law. He must call

his own attention to the matters which he is bound to consider ....

II

t:

~

f

7

Lord Denning MR in the case of Tameside (1977) AC at 1028 identified unreasonableness as, "so

wrong that no reasonable person could sensibly take that view"

As observed by this court the next friend of the Petitioner submitted additional material before the 151

Respondent, but the 151 Respondent had failed to consider anyone of them and his conduct clearly

shows his reluctance or refusal to consider the said material placed before him even at a later stage.

As further observed by this court, the next friend had written two letters requesting an opportunity for

him to place additional material to establish his religion. In this regard this court is mindful of the fact

that the decision to reject the application by the Petitioner was not taken after evaluating the

application submitted by the Petitioner after a proper interview but merely on an arbitrary decision by

the 151 Respondent and therefore question of appealing under the said circular 23/2013 will not arise in

such a situation.

The Petitioner's next friend had repeatedly requested an opportunity to face the interview but he was

not given the opportunity by the 151 Respondent and thereby he has failed to observe the basic rules of

natural justice or failed to act with procedural fairness.

As observed by Wade, It is fundermental to fair procedure that both sides should be heard, alldi

alterarn partern, hear the other side. This is the more far-reaching of the principles of Natural Justice;

since it can embrace almost every question of fair procedure, or due process and its implications can

be worked out in great detail. It is also broad enough to include the rule against bias since a fair

hearing must be an unbiased hearing, but in defence to the traditional dichotomy that rule has already

been treated separately.

(Administrative Law H.W.R WADE and C.F FORSYTH 10Ih Edition Page 402)

The applicability of the said rule in Administrative decisions were further discussed by Wade as

"Every administrative act was thus treated' Judicial' if it adversely affected any person's rights or

II

I

8

entailed a penalty. Exactly the same abuse of language was adopted in requiring a 'duty to act

judicially' as a condition of the availability of the remedies of Certiorari and Prohibition; .... "

(Administrative Law H.W.R. WADE and C.F. FORSYTH 10th Edition Page 407)

In the said circumstance it is clear that the impugned decision contained in P-20 and P-29 where the 1st

Respondent had decided to consider the Petitioner as a Christian student based on the school leaving

certificate of the next friend of the Petitioner was an unreasonable and arbitrary decision taken by him

without giving any opportunity for the next friend to explain and therefore the said decision is liable to

be quashed by a writ of Certiorari as prayed by the Petitioner.

During the arguments before this court the Learned State Counsel brought to our notice that the

Petitioner's application made to Nalanda College was not considered under the category it was

submitted and requested the court to consider granting an opportunity to hold a fresh interview rather

than issuing a writ of Mandamus directing the 15t to 3rd Respondents to admit the Petitioner as prayed

in paragraph (b) and (c) to the Petitioner. The Learned State Counsel went to the extent of inviting the

Petitioner for an interview to consider admission to the school to which the Petitioner did not agree.

However in this regard this court is mindful of the fact that the two appeals submitted by the

Petitioner's next friend on 01.09.2014 and 18.09.2014 where the next friend has pleaded with the 1st

Respondent,

qClG:))~C-' (3) Ol@B>@@ @C-')~@ts))O ql~@CS B>a 0~3) OClCSCl~ @Q)~ O~Q) oa~~C-'

0~3) (3)3)<35 t)o ~lClo)Cl6d )@Clo) qClc5c))o O@O) @l;~ @@O @3)j @@ OQ)~Q@C-'~

0)Q)6~Cl ts)og~ ts)6@~ @))@m l;6zCl) @Cl~@O~ 0)Q)6~C-' 3) gd65 (3)(3)0)Q)Cl ~gts)6 @l;~

But the 1st Respondent neither granted the Petitioner an opportunity to face the interview nor replied

the said appeal,

I !II

1< f ,

J f I ,Ij

r , I

I!1

t l f I ! ,

I ,

~ II

! f

9

The next friend being dissatisfied with the conduct of the lSI Respondent on 22.09.2014 lodged a

complaint with the Human Rights Commission.

At the inquiry before the Human Rights Commission criterion under which the Petitioner's application

was submitted was discussed and it was revealed that the Petitioner could only get 67 marks as against

75 marks which is the cut off point for admission. This position was confirmed by the 2nd Respondent

to the Human Rights Commission by his letter dated 20.07.2015 (P-20)

However during the inquiry before the Human Rights Commission it was revealed that another student

applied for admission to Nalanda College from the same Housing scheme where the Petitioner lived

had gained admission to Nalanda College and this position too was looked in to by the 2nd Respondent

once again by P-22 but the outcome of the said inquiry was not available before this court.

The Respondents along with their objections had submitted the applications submitted by the

Petitioner (R6a and R6b) as well as by the other applicant namely K.K.D. Nelundeniya (R5a and R5b).

As admitted by the Respondents before this court, both the above applicants were residents from

National Housing Scheme Cirpantine Road. As submitted by the Respondents when they calculate the

distance to the school from each house applicant Nelundeniya was residing 600 meters away from the

school and the Petitioner was residing 1000 meters away from the school. Due to this discrepancy in

the distance, the Petitioner has lost 25 marks for schools between his house and Nalanda College and

Nelundeniya had lost only 10 marks. It was further submitted by the lSI Respondent that the Petitioner

had got only 67 marks as against the 75 marks which is the cut off point. Even though the 2nd

Respondent by his letter dated 27.08.2015 had called for a report from the lSI Respondent with regard

to the said position, it was not clarified either before the Human Rights Commission or before this

court. However when the Human Rights Commission conveyed its decision to the 2nd Respondent

directing him to admit the Petitioner to Nalanda College, the 2nd Respondent by his letter dated

26.10.2015 informed his inability to enforce the said decision only for the reason that the Petitioner is

1t,\ I!,

f t 1 !

1i!,i !

1 i

f II iII

!

1

~. !I I

f tlII I ! I I

10

I I t \ Ia non Buddhist but failed to confirm that the Petitioner is not eligible to gain admission to Nalanda

1 , College on the criterion under which he submitted his application.

When considering the two contradictory position taken by the lSI Respondent when he allocated marks

to two applicants from the same housing scheme and the failure by the 2nd Respondent to submit the

report he called from the lSI Respondent with regard to the above discrepancy, it is clear that the said

Respondents were acting in collusion and mala-fide when the Respondents refused to implement the

directive of the Human Rights Commission based only on a criterion where no guide lines had been

given under the circular 23 of 2013 to identify the religion of the applicant.

In the said circumstance the Petitioner is entitled under law to gain admission to Nalanda College as

prayed by him in paragraph (c) to the Petition. II , ! ! I When considering material discussed above we make order,

I a) Issuing a writ of Certiorari quashing above decision contained in P-20 an P-29 to consider

!

the Petitioner as a Christian student based on the school leaving certificate of the next

friend

b) Issuing a writ of Mandamus directing the lSI to 3rd Respondents to admit the Petitioner to

the corresponding grade based on the application submitted to gain admission to grade one

of Nalanda College in the year 2015.

c) Directing to pay cost fixed at 15,000/-

Application allowed with cost fixed at 15,000/-.

President of the Court of Appeal

s. Thurairaja PC J

I agree, Judge of the Court of Appeal

j