IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1. Kusala Hasanthi Perera,

2. Wijayani Dhanayake,

Both of

Alhena Watte, Unella,

Paalatuva.

Petitioners

CASE NO: CA/WRIT/224/2017

Vs.

1. Gayantha Karunatilleke,

Minister of Lands and

Parliamentary Reforms,

Mihikatha Medura,

Land Secretariat,

Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

2. Dr. I.H.K. Mahanama,

Secretary, Ministry of Lands

and Parliamentary Reforms,

Mihikatha Medura,

Land Secretariat,

Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

3. P.K.C.N. Mahindagngna,

Divisional Secretary-

Thihagoda,

Secretariat, Matara.

2

4. R. M. Gamini,

Project Director,

Southern Expressway

Extension Project,

Road Development Authority,

1st Floor, Sethsiripaya,

Battaramulla.

5. D. C. Dissanayake,

Secretary,

Ministry of Highways and

Higher Education,

Maganeguma Mahamedura,

No. 216, Denzil Kobbekaduwa

Mawatha, Koswatta,

Battaramulla.

Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Chrishmal Warnasuriya with Anslam

Kaluarachchi, Priyantha Herath and

Arjuna Selvaraj for the Petitioners.

Nayomi Kahawita, S.C., for the

Respondents.

Argued on: 25.02.2020

Decided on: 03.03.2020

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The Petitioners filed this application seeking to quash by way

of a writ of certiorari the Notice issued under section 2 and

the Vesting Order issued under section 38 of the Land

3

Acquisition Act. They also seek to prohibit the Respondents

from taking further steps on the aforesaid Vesting Order by

way of a writ of prohibition.

This Court has refused the interim relief sought by the

Petitioners prohibiting the Respondents from taking any steps

pursuant to the said Vesting Order during the pendency of

this application.

The Respondents filed objections followed by counter

objections by the Petitioners to the substantive matter.

Written submissions were also filed by both parties. The

matter was fixed for argument thereafter. The case was not

taken up for argument due to various reasons. At one point

the parties had agreed to abide by a decision based on the

written submissions and Judgement was reserved.

Be that as it may, when this matter came up before this

Court on 25.02.2020, learned Counsel for the Petitioners

moved to amend the petition in order to challenge the

decisions of the Land Acquisition Resettlement Committee

(LARC) and Super Land Acquisition Resettlement Committee

(Super LARC). This was objected to by learned State Counsel

appearing for the Respondents.

The main argument of learned State Counsel is that the

Petitioners filed this application to challenge the Vesting

Order, and the decisions of the LARC and the Super LARC are

in relation to the award of compensation, and therefore the

Petitioners can only challenge the decisions of the LARC and

Super LARC if they accept that the Vesting Order is lawful.

4

In reply, learned Counsel for the Petitioners states that the

decisions of the LARC and Super LARC, as reflected in R7

(filed with the statement of objections of the Respondents)

and P23 (filed with the motion of the Attorney-at-Law for the

Petitioners dated 02.03.20202) respectively, came into being

only after the filing of this application and therefore the

Petitioners could not challenge those two decisions in the

original petition.

If this Court is to accept the argument of learned Counsel for

the Petitioners, the said application of the Petitioners in my

view is bound to fail.

The acquisition process ends with an award of compensation

to the persons whose lands have been acquired.

Notwithstanding the acquisition process and compensation

process are interconnected and cannot be considered in

watertight compartments, they are two different processes for

which different principles apply. In my view, an award of

compensation is a different cause of action, which has

accrued, according to learned Counsel for the Petitioners

himself, after the filing of this application.

The Petitioners cannot be allowed to amend the petition in

order to accommodate new causes of action which arose after

the filing of the application. This will change the character of

the application. A party cannot be allowed to amend the

pleadings so as to convert an action of one character to an

action of another and inconsistent character. (Vide Lebbe v.

Sandanam (1963) 64 NLR 461, Thirumalay v. Kulandavelu

(1964) 66 NLR 285, Senanayake v. Anthonisz (1965) 69 NLR

225, Thenuwara v. Simo Nona [2005] 2 Sri LR 309.)

5

In my view the proposed amendment would manifestly

convert the action of the Petitioner from one character to an

action of another and inconsistent character.

In Jayaratne v. Jayaratne [2002] 3 Sri LR 331, it was held

that The cause of action based on adultery has arisen after

the defendant has filed his answer. It is a different and

independent cause of action. Rights of parties are determined

as at the date of plaint.

In Hatton National Bank v. Silva [1999] 3 Sri LR 113, it was

held that The plaintiff cannot amend the plaint to include a

new cause of action which arose after the institution of the

action.

For the aforesaid reasons the application of the Petitioners to

amend the original petition is dismissed. No costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal