IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Case No: CA (PHC) 97/2015

P.H.C. Chilaw Case No: HCR OS/2015

M.C. Marawila Case No: 97916

In the matter of an Appeal made in terms of section 331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 read with Article 138 and 154P(6) of the Constitutiori of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

The OlC, Police Station, Wennappuwa.

Vs.

Complainant

Rathugamage Sunil Damien Fernando, Katukenda, Dankotuwa.

Accused

Liyanarachchige Sarath Vijaykumara, No. 83/09, Godella, Dankotuwa Claimant

AND BETWEEN

Liyanarachchige Sarath Vijaykumara, No. 83/09, Godella, Dankotuwa Claimant-Petitioner Vs.

Page 1 of 14

l

BEFORE

COUNSEL

1. The Attorney General Attorney-General's Department, Colombo 12. 2. The OlC, Police Station, Wennappuwa.

Respondents

AND NOWBETWEEN

Liyanarachchige Sarath Vijaykumara, No. 83/09, GodeUa, Dankotuwa

Vs.

Claimant-Petitioner-Appellant

1. The Attorney General Attorney-General's Department,

Colombo 12. 2. The OIC,

Police Station, Wennappuwa. Respondents-Respondents

K. K. Wickremasinghe, 1. Mahinda Samayawardhena, 1.

AAL Dimuthu Senarath Bandara with AAL Ramitha Dissanayake for the Claimant-Petitioner-Appellant

Page 2 of 14

ARGUED ON

WRIITEN SUBMISSIONS

DECIDED ON

K.K.WICKREMASINGHE, J.

NaY0ll!i Wickremasekara, SSC for the Respondents-Respondent s

12.03.2019

The Claimant-Petitioner-Appellant - On 29.10.2018 The Respondents-Respondents - On 29.10.2018 & 04.06.2019

20.09.2019

The Claimant-Petitioner-Appellant has filed this appeal seeking to set aside the

order of the Learned High Court Judge of the Provincial High Court of North

Western Province holden in Chi law dated 15.09.2015 in Case No. HCR 05/2015

and seeking to set aside the confiscation order made by the Learned Magistrate of

Marawila dated 20.04.2015 in Case No. 97916.

Facts of the Case:

The accused-driver (hereinafter referred to as the 'accused') was charged in the

Magistrate's Court of Marawila for transporting timber worth of Rs. 6463.34 on or

about 13.02.2015, utilizing a vehicle bearing No. 68-5346 and thereby committed

an offence punishable under the Forest Ordinance. The accused pleaded guilty to

the charge and the Learned Magistrate convicted him and imposed a fine of Rs.

10,0001=.

Thereafter, a vehicle inquiry was held with regard to the vehicle bearing number

No. 68-5346 and the claimant-petitioner-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Page 3 of 14

'appellant') claimed the vehicle in the said ,inquiry. At conclusion of the inquiry,

the Learned Magistrate confiscated the vehicle by order dated 20.04.2015.

Being aggrieved by the said order, the appellant filed a revision application in the

Provincial High Court of North Western Province holden in Chilaw, which was

dismissed by the Learned High Court Judge on 15.09.2015.

Thereafter, the appellant preferred this appeal.

The Learned Counsel for the appellant averred followin& grounds of appeal in the

written submissions;

1. The Learned High Court Judge and the Learned Magistrate have failed to

appreciate that the degree and limits of precautions an owner of vehicle

could take depend on the prevailing circumstances of each case, and thereby

erred in concluding that the appellant has failed to sufficiently show cause in

the confiscation inquiry.

2. The Learned High Court Judge erred in refusing to follow the judgment of

this Court in case No. CA (PHC) 03/2013, which is more fully appropriate

under the circumstances of the present matter.

3. In any event the confiscation of the vehicle is bad in law due to the relevant

charge being framed under a repealed and non-existing provision of law

4. The confiscation order is bad in law due to the failure of the Learned

Magistrate to charge the accused under the specific penal provision which

empowers liability of confiscation.

At the vehicle inquiry, the appellant and one Nilmini gave evidence. As per the

evidence, said Nilmini was the registered owner from whom the appellant bought

the vehicle in question, on a power of attorney. The accused was a close friend of

Page 4 of 14

the appellant and the vehicle was given on a. request of the accused. The appellant

testified that he had no knowledge about an illegal transport of timber.

The Learned Counsel for the appellant contended that the Learned High Court

Judge and the Leamed Magistrate have failed to appreciate that the degree and

limits of precautions an owner of vehicle could take depend on the prevailing

circumstances of each case. It was argued that uniformity of an equal level of

precautions should not be expected from every vehicle owner. It was further

submitted that the appellant had a very limited scope in.. the precautions he could

take and the Leamed Magistrate should not have expected a higher degree of

precautions from the appellant.

In answer to the above contention, the Learned SSC for the respondent submitted

that village social background does not exclude criminal liability imposed upon a

person and since the purpose of the Act is to ensure the forest is saved, the Act

includes strict provisions to ensure that no person transports timber without a valid

license.

As per section 40 of the Forest Ordinance (as amended) a vehicle owner in

question is required to prove to the satisfaction of the Court that he had taken all

precautions to prevent an offence being committed utilizing his vehicle.

In the case of Tbe Finance Company PLC. V. Agampodi Mabapedige

Priyantba Cbandana and 5 otbers [SC AppeallOSAJ2008], it was held that,

"On a consideration of the ratio decidendi of all the aforementioned

decisions, it is abundantly clear that in terms of section 40 of the Forest

Ordinance, as amended, if the owner of the vehicle in question was a third

party, no order of confiscation shall be made if that owner had proved to

the satisfaction of the Court that he had taken all precautions to prevent

Page 5 of 14

the use of the said vehicle for the co.mmission of the offence. The ratio

decidendi of all the aforementioned decisions also show that the owner has

to establish the said matter on a balance of probability. " (Emphasis added)

In the case of Ceylinco Leasing Corporation Limited V.M.H. Harison and

others [SC Appeal No. 43/2012 - decided on 08.12.2016], it was observed that,

"Forest Ordinance No.16 of 1907, is described in its long title as "an

Ordinance to consolidate and amend the law relating to forests and felling

and transport of timber". Some of the provisions of the Act reflects the

choice of policy, in the instant case it is undoubtedly designed with a view to

protect the environment. "

I wish to express my agreement with the above observation. It is manifestly clear

that the Legislature was trying to enact strict provisions with regard to the offences

concerning the environment. This attempt was manifested through avoiding to

mention about the knowledge of the vehicle owner, in the requirements under

section 40 of the Forest Ordinance as well. In such a backdrop, I do not think: that a

vehicle owner can simply get away from the burden of proving the precautions

taken by him, by stating that he had a limited control over the vehicle. Having a

limited control over his own vehicle itself proves that the vehicle owner was not

taking his responsibility of ensuring the vehicle was not used for any illegal

purpose, m a senous manner.

The Learned Magistrate made the following observation is his order;

" <3"'JO ~ 0 e'l ql3 lSJ2:i)JB",~ iS3 2:i)OJ2:5)'2:5)J~ e'lJ2sl'Q GCi:b@~ 2:5)' cvg2:5)' ql3 lSJEb8 2:i)

zSl"'2:5) od", ~lSJ e'l@6.!a 2:i)J~"''''2Sl' e"e;WJ WJe'l1SlJ zSlB Dl@l2Sl'e:lC) CD1tj Gl~

zSl8 ~ 9~DJO 2Sl' ~ ~ ~ '" 2Sl' e" e;wzrl 2:i) 0 2:5)l1Sl. <3"'JO~ oe'l ql3 lSJ2:i)JB", e"o!Sl' e'le5",

~ (!bO "'2:5) q"'C) Ol&C@C e"e;w2:5)' 2:i)lzrlC) ~ od ", oDoJ ~@zrl OS d

Page 6 of 14

e.:l@l@25fc:l @e.:lJc.:lJ @2m@l~ @El lflc.:l@a:f e.:l?z:;iQ ct~El ZSlrog6t @D ... " (Page 70 of

the brief)

The Learned Magistrate further observed that the appellant had given his vehicle to

a third party, without taking any precaution, just after 06 days he bought the

vehicle. [ think that the Learned Magistrate was very correctly evaluating the

evidence to find out the precautions taken by the appellant as required by the

Forest Ordinance. I am of the view that not mentioning any precautions taken by a

vehicle owner, arguing that precautions could depend.,?n circumstances, is not

sufficient to satisfy Court on a balance of probability that the vehicle owner took

precautions within his capability. It is clear that the Learned Magistrate was not

expecting any higher degree of precautions, but was evaluating the evidence in

order to find out whether the appellant had fulfilled the requirements stated in

section 40 of the Forest Ordinance. Therefore, I do not see any merits in the first

ground of appeal.

The Learned Counsel for the appellant argued that the Learned High Court Judge

erred in refusing to follow the judgment of this Court in case No. CA (PHC)

03/2013, which is more fully appropriate under the circumstances of the present

matter.

The Learned SSC for the respondent submitted that considering the value of timber

and previous convictions would futile the purpose for which the Act was enacted.

The Learned High Court Judge has referred to several cases in his order, including;

1. H.G. Sujith Priyantha V. OIC, Police Station, Poddala and others ICA

(PHC) 157/2012 - decided on 19.02.2015]

2. A.M. Sadi Banda V. Officer-in Charge, Police Station, Norton Bridge

ICA (PHC) 03/2013 - decided on 25.07.2014]

Page 7 of 14

However, the Learned High Court Judge stated that he decided to follow the decision in the case of Sujith Priyantha (supra), since the Court is not prevented

from following the said decision as per Stare decisis rule. Both these cases were

decided by a bench consisting two Judges of this Court.

I observe that facts of the A.M. Sadi Banda (supra) case are quite different from

the instant appeal. Further, I observe that the sole requirement of section 40 is

'proving precautions taken by the vehicle owner to prevent an offence being

committed'. The Act does not specify about the value of timber. Therefore, it is .... understood that the purpose of section 40 is to confiscate a vehicle involved in an

offence under Forest Ordinance regardless of the value of the timber. As I have

already observed, the purpose of the Act would not be achieved if the Court

decides to look into external factors like value of the timber and previous

convictions against the same vehicle, since section 40 specifically lays down

requirements to be fulfilled in order to avoid a vehicle being confiscated.

Therefore, I am of the view that the Learned High Court Judge was not forbidden

from following a different decision of this Court, other than Sadi Banda case, as he

found it more relevant.

At this juncture, I wish to consider 3rd and 4th grounds of appeal together since both

these grounds address a defect in the charge. The Learned Counsel for the

appellant contended the confiscation of the vehicle is' bad in law due to the relevant

charge being framed under a repealed and non-existing provision of law and due to

the failure of the Learned Magistrate to charge the accused under the specific penal

provision which empowers liability of confiscation.

The Learned Counsel for the appellant submitted following cases in support of his

contention;

Page 8 of 14

1. Abdul Sameem V. The Bribery Com!'lissioner (1991) 1 Sri LR 76

2. Godage and others V. OIC, Kahawatte Police (1992) 1 Sri LR 54

3. David perera V Attorney General (1997) 1 Sri LR 370

4. Fernando V. Attorney General (1985 Srikantha Law Reports 1 CA)

5. Ebert V. Perera [23 NLR 362)

I observe that case of Godage (supra) and Abdul Sameem (supra) had dealt with

the issue of failure to frame a charge sheet by the Learned Magistrates. In the case

of Godage, there was no charge sheet at all. In the c~se of Abdul Sameem, a

written report was filed by the Bribery Commissioner, that the accused had

committed two offences under the Bribery Act and the Magistrate adopted the said

report by placing a seal. In the said case, there had been a failure to frame charge

by the Learned Magistrate. Therefore, I find these cases to be very different from

the instant appeal and they are not supportive of the argument raised by the

Learned Counsel for the appellant.

Section 164(4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act stipulates that the law

and section of the law, under which the offence said to have been committed is

punishable, shall be mentioned in the charge. As per Section 166 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act,

"Any error in stating either the offence or the particulars required to be

stated in the charge and any omission to state the offence or those

particulars shall not be regarded at any stage of the case as material, unless

the accused was misled by such error or omission."

Accordingly, it is understood that a mere omission or defect in the charge sheet

would not be regarded as material unless said defect has caused prejudice to the

appellant. I observe that, the charge of the instant case contained relevant details of

the offence such as the date of the offence, the place of offence committed, vehicle

Page 9 of 14

number, value of the timber, section of the 9ffence, relevant gazette notifications

and relevant amendments. The charge refers to section 38(a), 40(a) and 25(2) of

the Forest Ordinance. I am of the view that these particulars were reasonably

sufficient to give the accused notice of the matter with which he was charged.

The Learned Counsel for the appellant submitted that there is no reference to the

Amendment Act No. 65 of 2009 and section 40(1) in the charge sheet.

Accordingly, it was contended that section 40(1) should have been expressly

mentioned in the charge since confiscation is a punishmet!t.

As per section 40(1)(b), all tools, vehicles, implements, cattle and machines used

in committing an offence under the Forest Ordinance, shall in addition to any other

punishment specified for such offence, be confiscated by order of the convicting

Magistrate. I am of the view that section 40(1) has application to the whole

Ordinance. Therefore, any vehicle involved in an offence under the Forest

Ordinance shall be subject to confiscation upon a valid conviction regardless ofthe

said section 40 being mentioned in the charge sheet or not. Accordingly, I am of

the view that it is not mandatory to expressly mention section 40(1) in the charge

sheet. Further, such non-mentioning would not cause any prejudice to a vehicle

owner since only an accused is charged in such offences. The vehicle owner in

question is not mentioned in the charge sheet and confiscation follows only after a

valid conviction. Therefore; I am of the view that the section, under which the

accused is charged, being mentioned is sufficient and confiscation is inevitable for

the vehicle owner subsequent to a valid conviction arisen from the said charge.

Further, it is imperative to note that the accused-driver in the instant appeal had

pleaded guilty to the charge of illegally transporting timber.

Page 10 of 14

In the case of H.P.D. Nimal Ranasinghe V.,OIC, Police, Hettipola [SC Appeal

149/2017], it was held that,

"The question that must be decided is whether any prejudice was caused to

the accused-appellant as a result of the said defect in the charge sheet or

whether he was misled by the said defect. It has to be noted here that the

accused-appellant, at the trial, had not taken up an objection to the charge

sheet on the basis of the said defect. In this connection judicial decision in

the case of Wickramasinghe Vs Chandradasa 6z.. NLR 550 is important.

Justice Sri Skanda Rajah in the said case observed thefollowingfacts.

"Where in a report made to Court under Section 148(1)(b) of the

Criminal Procedure Code, the Penal Provision was mentioned but, in

the charge sheet from which the accused was charged, the penal

section was not mentioned. "

His Lordship held as follows;

"The omission to mention in a charge sheet the penal section is not a

fatal irregularity if the accused has not been misled by such omission.

In such a case Section 171 of the Criminal Procedure Code is

applicable. "

In the case ofB. G. Sujith Priyantha (supra), it was held that,

"In this instance, the claim of the appellant who is not an accused in the

case had been made after the two accused were found guilty on their own

plea. Therefore, it is understood that the Court was not in a position to

consider the validity of the charge sheet at that belated point of time. Indeed,

an application under the aforesaid proviso to Section 40 in the Forest

Page 11 of 14

Ordinance could only be made when cpnfiscation has taken place under the

main Section 40 of the Forest Ordinance. Aforesaid main Section 40 of the

Forest Ordinance imposes a duty upon the Magistrate who convicted the

accused under the Forest Ordinance to confiscate the vehicle used in

committing such an offence. Furthermore, the word "shall" is used in that

main section and therefore the confiscation of the vehicle is automatic when

the accused is found guilty. Accordingly, it is clear that the law referred to

in the proviso to Section 40 is applicable only thereafter. Therefore, I

.... conclude that the appellant who made the application relying upon the

proviso to Section 40 is not entitled to raise an issue as to the defects in the

charge after the accused have pleaded guilty to the charge under Section 40

of the Forest Ordinance.

In the case of A.K.K. Rasika Amarasinghe V. Attorney General and another

[SC Appeal 140/2010], it was held that,

"The Accused-Appellant has not raised an objection to the charge at the

trial. In the first place we note that at page 97, the Accused-Appellant has

admitted that he knows about the charge. As I pointed out earlier the

Accused-Appellant has failed to raise any objections to the charge at the

trial. In this regard I rely on the judgment of the Court of Criminal Appeal

in 45 NLR page 82 in King V. Kitchilan wherein the Court of Criminal

appeal held as follows:

"The proper time at which an objection of the nature should be taken

is before the accused has pleaded"

It is well settled law that if a charge sheet is defective, objection to the

charge sheet must be raised at the very inception."

Page 12 of 14

Accordingly, it is understood that a party is flot allowed to raise an objection with

regard to a defect in the charge sheet at a belated point of time. The appellant

should have raised this objection as early as possible. Therefore, I am of the view

that the allowing the appellant to stand on the ground of defective charge at this

stage will lead to absurdity. Accordingly, last two grounds of appeal should

necessarily fail.

Considering above, I see no reason to interfere with the findings of the Learned

High Court Judge and the Learned Magistrate. Therefore". I affirm the order of the

Learned Magistrate dated 20.04.2015 and the order of the Learned High Court

Judge dated 15.09.2015.

The appeal is hereby dismissed without costs.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Page 13 of 14

Cases referred to:

I. The Finance Company PLC. V. Agampodi Mahapedige Priyantha Chandana and 5 others

[SC Appeal 105A!2008]

2. Ceylinco Leasing Corporation Limited V. M.H. Harison and others [SC Appeal No.

43/2012]

3. H.G. Sujith Priyantha V. orc, Police Station, Poddala and others rCA (PHC) 157/2012]

4. A.M. Sadi Banda V. Officer-in Charge, Police Station, Norton Bridge rCA (PHC)

03/2013]

5. H.P.D. Nimal Ranasinghe V. OIC, Police, Hettipola [SC Appeal 149/2017] , 6. A.K.K. Rasika Amarasinghe V. Attorney General and another [SC Appeal 140/2010]

Page 14 of 14