1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

In the matter of an Application for Writs in the nature of Certiorari in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

KIA Motors (Lanka) Limited, 297, Union Place, Colombo 2. Petitioner

CA (Writ) Application No: 66/2013

Vs.

1. Consumer Affairs Authority. 2. Rumy Marzook, 2A. Dr. R. M. K. Ratnayake,

2B. Hasitha Thilakerathne,

2C. Anura Maddegoda,

2D. Dr. Lalith N. Senaweera,

Chairman, Consumer Affairs Authority, C. W. E. Secretariat Building, 27, Vauxhall Street, Colombo 2. 3. Dr. W. W. Gunaratne, No. 2, Mosque Road, Beruwela. Respondents

2

Before: Arjuna Obeyesekere, J Counsel: Sanjeeva Jayawardena, P.C., with Ms. Prashanthi Mahindarathne and Charitha Rupesinghe for the Petitioner Vikum De Abrew, Senior Deputy Solicitor General for the 1st and 2nd Respondents Sanath Singhage for the 3rd Respondent Oral submissions: 19th September 2019 Written Submissions: Tendered on behalf of the Petitioner on 5th March 2019 Tendered on behalf of the 1st and 2nd Respondents on 19th November 2018

Tendered on behalf of the 3rd Respondent on 29th October 2018 Decided on: 26th May 2020

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

The Petitioner has invoked the jurisdiction of this Court to quash the decision

to replace the vehicle that it sold to the 3rd Respondent. The issue that this

Court is therefore called upon to consider in this application is whether the

said decision is illegal, unreasonable and contrary to the principles of

proportionality.

3

Introduction

The facts of this matter, very briefly, are as follows.

The Petitioner is the registered sole authorised distributor in Sri Lanka for KIA

motor vehicles manufactured in South Korea. The 3rd Respondent, who at the

relevant time was a Doctor in Government Service, placed an order with the

Petitioner in May 2011, for the importation and supply of a KIA Sorento motor

vehicle under the preferential tariff scheme granted to Government Sector

employees.1 The Petitioner imported2 and delivered the said vehicle, bearing

Registration No. WP KS-3850, to the 3rd Respondent on 15th February 2012.

The said vehicle was accompanied by a manufacturers warranty, marked P7,

valid for a period of 03 years from the date of delivery, or for the first

100,000km, whichever came first.

It is admitted between the parties that the issue that culminated in this

application, began on the date of delivery of the said vehicle. The 3rd

Respondent, having taken delivery of the vehicle had informed the Petitioner

that the air-conditioning in the vehicle had ceased to function, and that upon

inspection, he had found that the radiator did not contain any coolant. The

vehicle had been returned to the Petitioner on the same day, at its request.

Upon inspection, the Petitioner had found that the loss of the coolant was due

to the Radiator Upper Hose becoming loose. The Petitioner states that it

returned the vehicle to the 3rd Respondent the same day, having rectified the

1 Approval granted to the 3rd Respondent by the Department of Trade, Tariff and Investment Policy, Ministry of Finance and Planning, to import a motor vehicle on concessionary terms, has been annexed to the petition marked P2. 2The Bill of Lading, Commercial invoice and the Packing List in respect of the importation of the said vehicle have been annexed with the petition marked P4, P5 and P6 respectively.

4

said error by tightening the said hose and restoring the level of coolant, free of

charge.

This Court observes that even though the 3rd Respondent had collected the

vehicle, he had expressed concern about the said issue a few days thereafter,

prompting the Petitioner to inform the 3rd Respondent as follows:3

Your letter dated 2012.02.20 on the subject vehicle refers. Our

investigation revealed that there had been a coolant leak through inlet

pipe/inlet hose connection. The connection clamp has been properly re-

fixed, the cooling system has been thoroughly checked. Further, the

coolant leak has not affected the engine and we guarantee that there

would be no consequential effect originating from this cause. (emphasis

added)

On 17th May 2012, which is three months after the above incident, the 3rd

Respondent notified the Petitioner that the temperature gauge of the vehicle

was indicating an increase in temperature. At the request of the Petitioner, the

3rd Respondent handed over the vehicle to the service centre of the Petitioner

on the same day. This Court observes that the odometer reading of the said

vehicle at that time was 1300km,4 which is evidence that the vehicle had been

used since delivery. As the inspection had not revealed any particular issue, the

Petitioner had concluded that there was a problem with the heat sensor

known as the Sensor Assembly Coolant. The Petitioner had therefore

replaced the defective part with a brand-new sensor, free of charge and

returned the vehicle to the 3rd Respondent on 21st May 2012.

3 Vide letter dated 24th February 2012, marked 1R1. 4 Vide Invoice dated 17th May 2012, marked 1R2.

5

Even after the replacement of the sensor, the issue had persisted, with the

vehicle indicating rising temperatures, resulting in the 3rd Respondent

returning the vehicle to the Petitioner on 30th May 2012. The Petitioner states

that upon inspection, it was discovered that the rising temperature was due to

a malfunctioning of the gasket caused by the vehicle running without coolant

due to the initial leakage. The damaged gasket was replaced by the Petitioner,

free of charge, and the vehicle was returned to the 3rd Respondent on 11th

June 2012.

At the time the vehicle was handed over, the Petitioner informed the 3rd

Respondent as follows:

We are pleased to inform that your vehicle is ready for collection after

replacement of Head Gasket. We regret any inconvenience caused due to

overheating problem experienced in your vehicle. Further, we assure you

that we will look after your vehicle as per the warranty conditions

pertaining to KIA Sorento.5 (emphasis added)

The Petitioner states that it carried out a scan of the vehicle on 9th July 2012,

and that the scan did not reveal any other problem with the vehicle. The

odometer reading at this point was 2009km.6

There is no dispute between the parties that there was an issue in the brand

new vehicle which was sold to the 3rd Respondent and that the said vehicle

developed problems immediately after it was delivered to the 3rd Respondent,

5 Vide letter dated 11th June 2012 marked 1R3. 6 Vide Invoice dated 9th July 2012, marked 1R2.

6

causing the 3rd Respondent to return the vehicle to the Petitioner for repairs,

on three separate occasions. There is also no dispute between the parties that

the Petitioner did in fact repair the said issue under and in terms of the

warranty P7 by replacing the sensor and the gasket, at no cost to the 3rd

Respondent.

The Petitioner states that after the replacement of the gasket, the 3rd

Respondent had no further complaints about the vehicle, and that the vehicle

had been brought in for its regular service on 25th July 2012 and 14th

September 20127. The Petitioners position therefore is that the 3rd

Respondent continued to use the said vehicle without any issue. It is noted

that apart from an averment in the Statement of Objections of the 3rd

Respondent that the vehicle had several issues after it was handed over, the

3rd Respondent has not produced before 1st Respondent, the Consumer Affairs

Authority (the CAA / Authority / 1st Respondent), any material to show that the

vehicle continued to be defective or that he cannot use the vehicle.

Complaint by the 3rd Respondent to the Consumer Affairs Authority

On or about 8th June 2012, which is prior to taking delivery of the vehicle after

the replacement of the gasket, the 3rd Respondent had filed a complaint with

the CAA. A copy of the said complaint has not been produced before this

Court. By letter dated 20th June 2012, annexed to the petition marked P11,

the Director (Compliance and Enforcement) of the CAA had informed the

Petitioner as follows:

7 The odometer reading stood at 4723 km vide P8.

7

fodaI iys; jdykhla iusnkaO meusKs,a,

Wla; ldrKh iusnkaOfhka fnSrej,, m,a,sh mdr, fkd 02, ys mosxps ffjoH vnS vns

.=Kr;ak uy;d jsiska 2012/06/08 oske;sj wm wOsldrsh fj; fhduq lrk ,o

meusKs,a, yd nefoa.

tls meusKs,a,g wkqj meusKs,slre jsiska Tn wdh;kfhka SORENTO (WP KS 3850)

jra.fha fudagra r:hla us, os f.k we;. tys wjia:d lSmhloS we;sjq fodaI iy.;

;;ajhla fya;=fjka th Tn wdh;kh jsiska w,q;ajevshdlr oS we;s nj meusKs,af,a

i|yka fjS. tfy;a tu fudagra r:h kj;u fudagra r:hla f,i wdkhkh l<o,

tu r:h fodaI iy.; nejska ta i|yd idOdrKhla bgq lr fok f,i fuu

wOsldrsfhka b,a,d isgs.

By P11, the Petitioner had been requested to call over at the CAA on 6th July

2012. A preliminary discussion had accordingly taken place at the CAA on that

day between the Petitioner and the 3rd Respondent, where the CAA had

attempted to resolve the said dispute. The discussion that took place had

centred around the Petitioner providing an extended warranty on the said

vehicle, which request, however had been rejected by the Petitioner, on the

basis that the vehicle is being used by the 3rd Respondent without any issue.8

Inquiry by the Consumer Affairs Authority

The power of the CAA to conduct an inquiry into a complaint made to it

relating to goods, the procedure that should be followed, the manner in which

the decision should be taken, and the relief that could be granted by the CAA

to a complainant is set out in Section 13 of the Consumer Affairs Authority Act

No. 9 of 2003 (the Act / CAA Act).

8 Vide Minutes of the meeting held on 6th July 2012, marked P12 and the letter dated 13th July 2012 sent by the Petitioner to the CAA, marked P13.

8

In terms of Section 13(1) of the Act:

The Authority may inquire into complaints regarding

(a) the production, manufacture, supply, storage, transportation or sale

of any goods and to the supply of any services which does not

conform to the standards and specifications determined under

section 12; and

(b) the manufacture or sale of any goods which does not conform to the

warranty or guarantee given by implication or otherwise, by the

manufacturer or trader.

Section 13(3) specifies that, At any inquiry held into a complaint under

subsection (1), the Authority shall give the manufacturer or trader against

whom such complaint is made an opportunity of being heard either in person

or by an agent nominated in that behalf.

Section 13(4) of the Act reads as follows:

Where after an inquiry into a complaint, the Authority is of opinion that

a manufacture or sale of any goods or the provision of any services has

been made which does not conform to the standards or specifications

determined or deemed to be determined by the Authority, or that a

manufacture or sale has been made of any goods not conforming to any

warranty or guarantee given by implication or otherwise by the

manufacturer or trader, it shall order the manufacturer or trader to pay

compensation to the aggrieved party or to replace such goods or to refund

9

the amount paid for such goods or the provision of such service, as the

case may be.

Section 13 can thus be summarised as follows:

a) The CAA has the power to inquire into any complaint made to it, provided

such complaint comes within the provisions of paragraphs (a) or (b) of

Section 13(1);

b) The person against whom such complaint has been made has a right to be

heard;

c) The CAA has the power to provide the relief set out in Section 13(4) if the

CAA is of the opinion that the manufacture or sale has been made of any

goods not conforming to any warranty or guarantee given by implication

or otherwise.

A panel consisting of three members of the CAA had thereafter conducted an

inquiry into the said complaint of the 3rd Respondent on 9th October 2012, with

the participation of the Petitioner and the 3rd Respondent. According to the

proceedings of that date, marked 1R4, the representative of the Petitioner,

while admitting that the radiator hose had not been tightened properly, had

explained that it resulted in the discharge of coolant, which in turn resulted in

the overheating of the engine and that the damage to the gasket was a

consequence of the initial overheating. This Court has examined 1R4 and

observes that the relief sought by the 3rd Respondent was the replacement of

the vehicle with a new vehicle or that he be paid the market value of the

vehicle.

10

The Inquiry had continued before the same panel of members of the CAA on

4th December 2012. According to the proceedings of that date, marked 1R5,

the Petitioner and the 3rd Respondent had informed the Inquiry Panel that an

amicable resolution of the dispute is not possible. 1R5 bears out the following

observation made by the inquiry panel:

mrSlaIk uKav,h mjikafka ;uka lsisu wdldrhlska jHdmdrslhka g w.;shla

fkdlrk kuqoq mdrsfNda.slhkaf.a whs;sjdislus relsugo lemjk nejska lrekq

i,ld n,d fus ms,sn|j wjidk ksfhda.hla ,nd fok nj;a, th bgq lsrsug

js;a;slre neoS isgsk nj;ah.

The above observation is an indication that as at the end of the inquiry on 4th

December 2012, the inquiry panel had not arrived at a final decision.

Conveyance of the decision of the Consumer Affairs Authority to the

Petitioner

The 2nd Respondent had thereafter sent under his signature the following

letter dated 28th January 2013 annexed to the petition marked P17 to the

Petitioner and the 3rd Respondent:

mdrsfNda.sl lghq;= ms<sn| wOsldrsh mkf;a 13^1& j.ka;sh hgf;a lrkq ,nk

mrslaIKh - KIA fudagraia wdh;khg tfrys meusKs,a,

meusKs,slre( ffjoH vns. vns. .=Kr;ak uy;d

by; meusKs,slre jsiska mdrsfNda.sl lghq;= ms<sn| wOsldrsh fj; lrk ,o

meusKs,a,g wkqj mj;ajk ,o mrslaIKfhka wk;=re j 2003 wxl 09 ork

11

mdrsfNda.sl lghq;= ms<sn| wOsldrsh mkf;a 13^4& j.ka;sh hgf;a fuu kshuh

ksl=;a lrkq ,efnS.

tkus Tn wdh;kh fj;ska meusKs,slre us, os .;a fudagra r:hg we;=<;a Wmdx.

ish,a, wvx.= tu jra.fha u (Brand) kj;u fudagra r:hla meusKs,slre fj; ,nd

osh hq;= njg fuhska kshu lr isgsk w;r tlS kshuh ksl=;a l, osk isg osk 30

la we;=<; wod< kj; u fudagra r:h meusKs,slre fj; ,nd osug lghq;= l<

hq;= njg fuhska jevs oqrg;a kshu lrkq ,efnS.

The Petitioner states that although not referred to in P17, attached to P17

was the report of the inquiry panel dated 21st December 2012, which has been

annexed to the petition marked P18.

Application to this Court and the relief sought

Dissatisfied by the decision in P17 to replace the motor vehicle sold to the 3rd

Respondent with a brand-new vehicle of the same model and containing all

the features of the said vehicle, the Petitioner filed this application, seeking

the following relief.

(a) A mandate in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari, to quash the

order/decision/communication dated 28th January 2013, issued by the

2nd Respondent, the Chairman of the Consumer Affairs Authority,

annexed to the petition marked P17.

(b) A mandate in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari, to quash the findings of

the Panel of Inquiry, dated 21st December 2012, annexed to the petition

marked P18.

12

The grounds of challenge of the Petitioner

The learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioner is seeking a Writ of

Certiorari to quash the said decision P17 and the findings of the inquiry panel

contained in P18, on the following four principle grounds:

1. The decision conveyed by P17 has not been taken by the CAA, and is

therefore illegal.

2. An express warranty excludes the implied warranty provided by the CAA

Act.

3. The decision that the vehicle is not reasonably fit is unreasonable.

4. The decision to replace the vehicle is unreasonable and/or

disproportionate.

The first argument is the decision conveyed by P17, illegal?

It is the contention of the learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioner that

the decision contained in P17 has not been taken by the CAA and is therefore

illegal.

The power to conduct an inquiry

Section 13(1) of the Act appears to suggest, on the face of it, that every

complaint must be inquired into by the CAA. This Court however observes that

Section 6 of the CAA Act provides that the Authority may, for the purpose of

discharging its functions, delegate to a public officer, such functions vested in

13

or imposed upon or assigned to the CAA. Furthermore, in terms of Section

8(n), the CAA may appoint any such committee or committees as may be

necessary to facilitate the discharge of the functions of the CAA.

It is therefore the view of this Court that an inquiry into a complaint made to

the CAA can be conducted:

(a) by the CAA itself; or

(b) by a public officer to whom the function has been delegated in terms of

Section 6; or

(c) by a Committee appointed in terms of Section 8(n).

This Court wishes to make two observations at this stage. The first is that the

Respondents have admitted in paragraph 21 of its Statement of Objections

that no delegation of authority had taken place.9 The second is that the option

at (c) can be pursued only to facilitate the discharge of the functions of the

CAA and not to discharge the functions of the CAA.

What is important however and this is the thrust of the first argument

advanced on behalf of the Petitioner - is that the decision, or in other words,

the opinion that must be formed in order to provide the relief set out in

Section 13(4), must be that of the CAA. Therefore, even if an inquiry into a

complaint is conducted by a committee appointed for that purpose, the

responsibility for taking the final decision or in other words, of forming an

opinion in terms of Section 13(4), will always rest with the CAA. 9 In any event, none of the members of the inquiry panel were Public Officers, which is a pre-condition for the delegation of any function.

14

Quorum for any meeting of the CAA

This would perhaps be an appropriate stage to consider what or who is meant

by the CAA. In terms of Section 2(1), the CAA shall consist of the persons who

are for the time being members of the Authority under Section 3. Section 3(1)

provides that the Authority shall consist of a Chairman and not less than ten

other members who shall be appointed by the Minister from among persons

who possess recognized qualifications, have had wide experience and have

distinguished themselves in the field of industry, law, economics, commerce,

administration, accountancy, science or health. Section 3(2) proceeds to state

that the Chairman and three of the members, selected by the Minister from

among the members appointed under subsection (1), shall be full time

members of the CAA. Paragraph 8(2) of the Schedule to the Act provides that

the quorum for any meeting of the Authority shall be four members.

The procedure followed by the Consumer Affairs Authority

This Court will now consider the procedure that was followed by the CAA with

regard to the complaint made by the 3rd Respondent in order to ascertain

which of the above avenues was pursued by the CAA in inquiring into the

complaint of the 3rd Respondent. The objective of doing so is twofold. If the

inquiry panel was in fact acting as the CAA, as the learned Senior Deputy

Solicitor General sought to argue, then, its report P18 dated 21st December

2012 would be the decision of the CAA, and P17 would not be illegal, as P17

serves merely as a conveyance of the decision of the CAA in P18. If however,

the inquiry panel was not acting as the CAA, then this Court must consider if

P18 has been considered by the CAA, and if so, whether the decision

15

conveyed by the 2nd Respondent by P17 is a decision taken by the CAA, in

terms of the Act. In the event of this Court holding that P17 is a decision

taken by the CAA, the necessity would then arise for the CAA to give reasons as

to why they are following the findings of the Inquiry Panel.

Is the decision of the Inquiry Panel, P18, a decision of the Consumer Affairs

Authority?

As observed earlier, the preliminary discussion held on 6th July 2012 had been

with officers attached to the Compliance and Enforcement Division of the CAA.

Once the Petitioner informed its position by letter dated 13th July 2012 that an

extended warranty cannot be provided, the CAA had proceeded to conduct a

formal inquiry into the said complaint.

It was the submission of the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General that the

inquiry panel comprised of four members of the CAA, namely Mr. Milton

Amerasinghe, Major General N. Jayasuriya, Mr. Sunil Jayaweera, and Mr.

Varuna Alawwa, and that the inquiry panel functioned as the CAA when it

conducted the inquiry. This position is supported by the first paragraph of

P18 where it is stated that the inquiry is being held in terms of Section 13(1),

and the final paragraph of P18 which states that a decision is being taken in

terms of Section 13(4). The learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General submitted

further that the decision of the Inquiry Panel marked P18 has been ratified by

the entire Authority, at a meeting held on 21st December 2012.10

10 Vide document marked 1R12.

16

However, according to the inquiry notes / proceedings marked 1R4 and 1R5,

the inquiry had been conducted on both days by a panel comprising of three

members, namely Mr. Milton Amerasinghe, Major General N. Jayasuriya, and

Mr. Varuna Alawwa. 1R4 and 1R5 does not bear the name of Mr. Sunil

Jayaweera. This Court observes that the proceedings 1R4 have been recorded

by a Legal Officer of the CAA while the proceedings 1R5 have been recorded

by a Deputy Director of the CAA. Therefore, if Mr. Sunil Jayaweera was

present, his name would have been recorded in 1R4 and 1R5. No

explanation has been offered by the Respondents as to why the officer who

recorded the minutes did not record the name of Mr. Jayaweera, if he was

present during the inquiry.

As observed earlier, the quorum of the CAA is four members. By its own

documents marked 1R4 and 1R5, the 1st Respondent has established that

the quorum was not available, either on the first date of inquiry or on the

second date of inquiry. Thus, when Mr. Milton Amerasinghe, Major General N.

Jayasuriya, and Mr. Varuna Alawwa conducted the inquiry on 9th October 2012

and 4th December 2012, they could not have acted as the CAA. Any argument

that they did so as the CAA is not supported by the material that has been

placed before this Court.

This Court must note that no explanation has been offered to this Court by the

1st Respondent as to what authority Mr. Jayaweera had to sign P18, as he was

not a member of the inquiry panel that sat on 9th October 2012 and 4th

December 2012.

17

It would, perhaps, be appropriate for this Court to refer at this stage to the

judgment of this Court in Diesel and Motor Engineering PLC vs. Consumer

Affairs Authority and others11 where a similar situation had occurred. In that

case too, the panel of inquiry had consisted of only three members. However

when the settlement reached at the inquiry was later converted into an order

in terms of Section 13(4) of the Act, four members had signed it. The

explanation provided was that one of the members of the panel of inquiry had

stepped out and was not present when the settlement was entered into.

This Court, in answering the question if the said order was valid, due to a lack

of a quorum, held as follows:

As I stated earlier The quorum for any meeting of the Authority shall be

four members, and signing the formal order after several months of the

inquiry by four members will not validate an otherwise invalid meeting

due to lack of quorum. In this case the inquiry was held on 09.07.2013

and the order was made on 29.05.2014. According to the inquiry notes,

the inquiry has been held before three members, and the order has been

signed by those three members of the inquiry panel and another member

of the Authority. It is clear that there was no quorum to hold a proper

inquiry in order to make a legally enforceable order based on the

settlement arrived at in that inquiry.

It is perhaps too much of a coincidence that the identical situation has arisen in

two inquiries held within a space of one year. This Court is of the view that the

CAA must take its statutory responsibilities seriously, and must act according

11 CA (Writ) Application No. 43/2016; CA Minutes of 22nd November 2019.

18

to the applicable legal provisions, instead of resorting to practices that have a

facade of compliance and legality but in fact is not so. The CAA must bear in

mind that in terms of Section 13(6), failure to comply with an order made

under Section 13(4) attracts criminal prosecution, and that therefore the CAA

must ensure that the procedure laid down in the Act is followed scrupulously.

The above judgment is certainly not the first time that this Court has struck

down decisions of the CAA taken without a proper quorum. Shell Gas Lanka

Limited vs. Consumer Affairs Authority and Others12 was a case where the

petitioner made an application to the CAA in terms of section 18 of the CAA

Act seeking an upward revision in the price of an LP Gas Cylinder, which

application was refused by the CAA. The impugned decision had been taken by

the Pricing Committee of the CAA, consisting of three members who were also

members of the CAA. This Court expressed its reservation to the Pricing

Committee taking the impugned decision and held that:

It is essential that for the lawful exercise of power, it should be exercised

by the 1st Respondent Authority upon whom such power is conferred and

by no one else. .... I am unable to agree with the learned Senior State

Counsel that the powers of the Authority can be delegated to the Pricing

Committee. The Pricing Committee may facilitate the discharge of the

functions of the Authority. But, the Pricing Committee has no jurisdiction

to exercise the powers of the Authority.

This Court went on to hold that in the absence of a quorum, the decision of the

CAA was devoid of any legal effect, and therefore the said decision was

quashed. 12 [2007] 2 Sri LR 212; judgment of Sripavan, J (as he then was) with Sisira De Abrew, J agreeing.

19

In the above circumstances, and on the material presented to this Court, the

only conclusion that this Court can arrive at is that the Inquiry Panel did not

function as the CAA and that P18 is not a decision of the CAA.

Did the Consumer Affairs Authority take the decision that was conveyed by

P17?

This Court shall now consider whether the decision conveyed by P17 has

been taken by the CAA in accordance with the obligation imposed on it by

Section 13(4) of the Act.

In doing so, this Court shall bear in mind the statement of Lord Diplock in

Council of Civil Service Unions v. Minister for the Civil Service13, where, having

classified the three grounds upon which administrative action is subject to

judicial review, namely 'illegality', 'irrationality' and 'procedural impropriety',

he proceeded to state that by 'illegality' as a ground for judicial review I mean

that the decision maker must understand correctly the law that regulates his

decision making power and must give effect to it.

As noted earlier, in terms of Section 8(n) of the Act, the CAA can appoint a

committee to facilitate the discharge of its functions. The Respondents have

not placed any material before this Court to establish:

(a) that the said inquiry panel was a committee appointed in terms of Section

8(n); or

13 [1985] 1 AC 374.

20

(b) the nature of the mandate provided to the said Inquiry Panel by the CAA,

in view of its position that P18 was in fact a decision of the CAA.

This Court, being conscious of the fact that a decision maker can act on a

report submitted by a subordinate officer or a group of officers acting as a

committee, and in order to give meaning to the procedure adopted by the

CAA, would proceed on the basis that P18 is a report prepared by a

Committee that was appointed by the CAA in terms of Section 8(n) to facilitate

the discharge of the functions of the CAA, and consider if the decision that was

conveyed to the Petitioner by P17 has been arrived at by the CAA after a

consideration of P18.

As already noted, the Inquiry was concluded on 4th December 2012, with the

inquiry panel announcing that they would consider the facts and make a final

order (lrekq i,ld n,d fus ms,sn|j wjidk ksfhda.hka ,nd fok nj). The next

step that was taken, according to the 1st Respondent, was the preparation of a

Board Paper which the 1st Respondent has produced with its Statement of

Objections, marked 1R11 titled Summary of Orders issued by the Consumer

Affairs Authority.

This Court has examined 1R11, which is dated 14th December 2012 and

observes the following:

(a) The right corner column of 1R11 contains a summary of the order

made in 11 inquiries conducted by the CAA;

21

(b) The decision pertaining to the 3rd Respondents complaint is recorded as

follows: The inquiry panel made an order against the respondent

company to replace the defective car with a brand new motor car of same

make and model with similar options;

(c) As at 14th December 2012, the report of the Inquiry Panel dated 21st

December 2012 was not available, and hence P18 did not form part of

the Board paper;

(d) 1R11 has been prepared and submitted by the Director (Compliance and

Enforcement);

(e) 1R11 has been recommended by the Director General; and

(f) The submission of 1R11 has been approved by the 2nd Respondent, the

Chairman of the CAA.

There are two other salient features in 1R11 which this Court wishes to

advert to.

The first is that the purpose of 1R11 is to seek approval of the CAA for the

Orders referred to therein. Therefore, although it is titled Summary of Orders

issued by the Consumer Affairs Authority, the orders referred to in 1R11

cannot be orders made by the CAA, if further approval of the CAA is required.

The question of submitting an order of the CAA, to the CAA, does not make

legal sense.

The second and most important feature of 1R11 is that it is dated 14th

December 2012, which is one week prior to the reasons of the inquiry panel

22

P18 being issued.14 The learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioner quite

correctly pointed out this contradiction, thus raising a very serious doubt as to

how the Board paper 1R11 was prepared without the Director (Compliance

and Enforcement) knowing the outcome of the inquiry, and in the absence of

P18.

In order to clarify this position, the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General

appearing for the 1st Respondent, by way of a motion dated 27th September

2018 filed a document dated 4th December 2012, titled mrslaIK uKav,fha

;SrKh, which reads as follows:

meusKs,slre b,a,d isgskafka Tyq us,oS .;a jdykh yd iudk jra.fha kj;u

jdykhla jk Lejska kj jdykhla ,Ld oSu ioyd kshuhlA ,ndoSug ;SrKh lrk

,os.

This Court has several concerns with this document. The first is that no

explanation has been given in the motion as to how this document came to be

prepared or the purposes for which this document was utilised. The second is

that this document was not tendered to this Court with an affidavit, and does

not form part of the pleadings. The third is that no material has been placed to

demonstrate that this document was utilised in the preparation of 1R11. The

fourth is that this document has been signed by the four persons who have

signed P18, although the proceedings of that date, 1R5 do not contain all

four names. No explanation has been given for this ghost appearance by Mr.

Sunil Jayaweera for the sole purpose of signing this document, in respect of an

inquiry in which he did not participate.

14 P18 is dated 21st December 2012.

23

Be that as it may, in paragraph 16 of its Statement of Objections, the 1st

Respondent, having referred to P18 as an Order of the inquiry panel, states

that P18 was ratified by the Full Board at a meeting held on 22nd December

2012. Even though in paragraph 18 of the Statement of Objections, it has been

stated that P18 was ratified at a meeting held on 21st December 2012, this

Court shall disregard the said discrepancy, in view of 1R1215 which gives the

date of the meeting as 21st December 2012.

It is in the above background that this Court must consider whether P18 was

placed before the CAA at its meeting held on 21st December 2012. When this

Court considers that:

(a) P18 had been issued on the same date as that of the meeting of the

CAA;

(b) the 1st Respondent has not produced any proof to demonstrate that P18

was placed before the CAA, at the said meeting;

(c) the fact that 1R12 does not have any reference to P18; and

(d) the 1st Respondent has not produced any material to demonstrate that

the members of the CAA deliberated on the factual matters relating to

the complaint of the 3rd Respondent in the context of the provisions of

the CAA Act,

the only conclusion that this Court can arrive at is as follows:

(a) The report of the inquiry panel P18 was not placed before the CAA. 15 1R12 is an internal memorandum stating that 1R11 was considered on 21st December 2012, and that the Board approved the Paper

24

(b) The CAA did not deliberate whether there has been a breach of a

warranty by the Petitioner, implied or otherwise.

(c) The CAA did not deliberate as to what relief should be afforded to the 3rd

Respondent.

(d) The CAA has been completely oblivious to the fact that the law requires

the CAA, and no other, to decide on the matters set out in Section 13(4).

(e) The CAA has failed to decide whether there has been a breach of

warranty, implied or otherwise.

(f) Even if it was within the power of the CAA to ratify the decision of the

panel, it did so in complete ignorance of the reasons that led the inquiry

panel to conclude that the vehicle must be replaced by the Petitioner.

It was open to the 1st Respondent to take up the position that the three

members of the CAA who sat on the Inquiry Panel apprised the other members

of the CAA that sat at the meeting held on 21st December 2012, of the facts

and the reasons for their decision, and that the CAA therefore took an

informed decision. While such a fact is not reflected in the Board decision

1R12, the fact that such an explanation has not been offered gives credence

to the view taken by this Court that the members of the CAA that met on 21st

December 2012 were completely ignorant of the facts and circumstances

relating to the issue.

25

In Administrative Law by Wade and Forsyth,16 under the sub-heading of

Power in the wrong hands, it has been stated as follows:

The proper authority may share its power with someone else, or may

allow someone else to dictate to it by declining to act without their

consent or by submitting to their wishes or instructions. The effect then is

that the discretion conferred by Parliament is exercised, at least in part, by

the wrong authority, and the resulting decision is ultra vires and void. So

strict are the courts in applying this principle that they condemn some

administrative arrangements which must seem quite natural and proper

to those who make them. In this class might be included the case of the

cinema licensing authority which, by requiring films to be approved by the

British Board of Film Censors, was held to have surrendered its power of

control17 and also the case of the Police Complaints Board, which acted as

if it were bound by a decision of the Director of Public Prosecutions when

only required to have regard to it.18

The legal position in this regard has been clearly laid down in R (National

Association of Health Stores) v. Department of Health19 where it was held as

follows:

It would be an embarrassment both for government and for the Courts if we

were to hold that a minister or a civil servant could lawfully take a decision

on a matter he or she knew nothing about because one or more officials in

the department knew all about it. The proposition becomes worse, not

16 H.W.R. Wade, C.F, Forsyth, Administrative Law [11th Edition, 2014] Oxford University Press; page 269. 17 Ellis v. Dubowski; [1921] 3 KB 621. 18 R v. Police Complaints Board ex p Madden; [1983] 1 WLR 447. 19 [2005] EWCA Civ. 154; per Sedley J.

26

better, when it is qualified, as Crane J qualified it and as Mr Cavanagh now

seeks to qualify it, by requiring that the civil servants with the relevant

knowledge must have taken part in briefing or advising the minister. To do

this is to substitute for the Carltona doctrine20 of ordered devolution to

appropriate civil servants of decision-making authority (to adopt the lexicon

used by Lord Griffiths in Oladehinde [1991] 1 AC 254) either a de facto

abdication by the lawful decision-maker in favour of his or her adviser, or a

division of labour in which the person with knowledge decides nothing and

the decision is taken by a person without knowledge.

Conclusion In the above circumstances:

(a) This Court is of the view that the CAA has not formed an opinion as

required by Section 13(4) of the CAA Act that the relief afforded by P17

should be given.

(b) This Court is of the view that the CAA has merely rubber stamped the

decision of an inquiry panel or a committee, without even having seen the

colour of that report, which is an abdication of the statutory power

conferred on the CAA.

(c) This Court is in agreement with the first ground of challenge placed

before this Court by the learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioner

that P17 is not a decision taken by the CAA, and that the said decision is

illegal. 20 Carltona Ltd v Commissioners of Works [1943] 2 All ER 560. Sedley J in R (National Association of Health Stores) v. Department of Health stated that Carltona, however, establishes only that the act of a duly authorised civil servant is in law the act of his or her minister. It does not decide or even suggest that what the civil servant knows is in law the minister's knowledge, regardless of whether the latter actually knows it.

27

(d) This Court is therefore of the view that P17 is liable to be quashed by a

Writ of Certiorari.

The next course of action

In view of the above finding, this Court has two options. The first option

available to this Court is to consider the other grounds of challenge placed

before this Court by the learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioner with

regard to Sections 13 and 32, and to lay down, the opinion of this Court on the

questions of law arising from the said grounds. The second option is to direct

the CAA to consider the report of the inquiry panel P18, and arrive at a

decision in terms of Section 13(4) of the CAA Act, as the Petitioner has no

complaints with regard to the procedure followed by the inquiry panel or the

hearing afforded to it.

However, if this Court follows the second option, and the CAA arrives at the

same decision but in terms of the law, this Court may be faced with a similar

application, urging the same questions of law that have been raised in this

application relating to the said sections. Such a course of action would be to

the disadvantage of the Petitioner as well as the 3rd Respondent, as a fresh

application would necessarily entail substantial legal costs, and delay.

Hence, this Court is of the view that it should adopt the first option and

proceed to consider the other three arguments of the learned Presidents

Counsel for the Petitioner.

28

The second argument - does an express warranty exclude the implied

warranty given by the Act?

This Court shall now consider the second argument of the learned Presidents

Counsel for the Petitioner which is that when a manufacturer or trader has

extended a written or express warranty, as in this case, a consumer cannot

have the benefit of the implied warranty provided by the CAA Act in respect of

those goods. What this Court must consider is whether the implied warranty

provided in Section 32 is independent of the written warranty that a consumer

would be offered by a manufacturer or trader, so that, where there is a written

warranty, the consumer would not be entitled to the implied warranty. In

other words, the question is whether the consumer would be disentitled to the

protection afforded by way of an implied warranty under Section 32(1)(d)

where there is an express warranty given by the trader.

The protection of consumers is paramount

In considering this argument, this Court shall be mindful of the fact that the

CAA Act was introduced inter alia for the protection of consumers. There is

specific recognition of this fact in the preamble, which provides that it is the

policy of the Government of Sri Lanka to provide for the better protection of

consumers through the regulation of trade. The fact that the protection of

consumers is one of the primary objectives of the CAA is confirmed when one

considers the provisions of Section 7, which reads as follows:

The objects of the Authority shall be

29

(a) to protect consumers against the marketing of goods or the provision

of services which are hazardous to life and property of consumers;

(b) to protect consumers against unfair trade practices and guarantee

that consumers interest shall be given due consideration;

(c) to ensure that wherever possible consumers have adequate access to

goods and services at competitive prices; and

(d) to seek redress against unfair trade practices, restrictive trade

practices or any other forms of exploitation of consumers by traders.

It is pertinent to cite at this stage, the judgment of Justice Vijith

Malalgoda,P.C., P/CA (as he then was) in Micro Cars Ltd vs. Consumer Affairs

Authority and Others21, where this Court held as follows:

When considering the provisions of the Consumer Affairs Authority Act

along with its long title this Court is of the view that the said Act has been

primarily promulgated for the purpose of the effective competition and

protection of the consumers. Therefore, it is of paramount importance to

view the provisions of the Consumer Affairs Authority Act in the

perspective of not only of the effective competition but necessarily

focusing on the interest of the protection of the innocent consumers.

Under these circumstances it is the duty of this court when interpreting

the provisions of the Consumer Affairs Authority Act, to be mindful of the

object of the above Act.

21CA (Writ) Application No. 189/2014; CA Minutes of 1st July 2016.

30

This Court also referred to the judgment in Wickremaratne v.

Samarawickrema and others,22 which held that:

The basic rule of interpretation is that the legislative objective should be

advanced and that the provisions be interpreted in keeping with the

purpose of the legislature. The interpretation submitted by learned

counsel for the Appellant has the effect of defeating the objective of the

legislature and of detracting from its purpose.

In Shell Gas Lanka Limited vs Consumer Affairs Authority23 this Court

observed as follows:

The objectives of the Consumer Affairs Authority Act No. 9 of 2003 as

shown in its long title is the promotion of effective competition and the

protection of the consumers. Thus, the Court is bound to consider the

general legislative policy underlying the provisions contained (in) the Act.

While the Act protects traders and manufacturers against unfair trade

practices, the consumer interest shall also be given due consideration as

provided in section 7 of the said Act.

This Court however wishes to add a word of caution. That is, even though

protection of consumers is one of the primary objectives of the CAA Act, the

CAA must at all times strike a fair balance between the rights of the consumer

and the trader.

22 [1995] 2 Sri LR 212 at page 220; Judgment by S.N. Silva, J (as he then was). 23Supra.

31

The applicable provisions of the CAA Act

In order to place in perspective this argument of the Petitioner, it would be

necessary for this Court to lay down at the outset the relevant provisions of

the CAA Act.

This Court has already noted that in terms of Section 13(1)(b) of the CAA Act,

the Authority may inquire into complaints regarding the manufacture or sale

of any goods which do not conform to the warranty or guarantee given by

implication or otherwise, by the manufacturer or trader.

Section 13(4) provides that where after an inquiry into a complaint, the

Authority is of opinion that . a manufacture or sale has been made of any

goods not conforming to any warranty or guarantee given by implication or

otherwise by the manufacturer or trader, it shall order the manufacturer or

trader to pay compensation to the aggrieved party or to replace such goods or

to refund the amount paid for such goods or the provision of such service, as

the case may be.

On a plain reading of Sections 13(1)(b) and 13(4), it is clear that the CAA Act

recognises two types of warranties. The first is an implied warranty, which,

when read together with the provisions of Section 32(1)(d) of the CAA Act,

(which is the paragraph in Section 32(1) that is applicable to the facts of this

application), means that goods supplied will be reasonably fit for the purpose

for which they are supplied. The second type of warranty is the warranty which

is otherwise given by the manufacturer or trader. There is no dispute

between the parties that the reference to otherwise is a reference to a

32

written or express warranty that is given by the manufacturer or trader at the

point of sale and/or supply of the good.

The argument of the learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioner is premised

on the use of the word or between the words, warranty given by

implication and otherwise in Sections 13(1)(b) and 13(4). When this Court

considers these two Sections, it is clear that the Legislature has recognised the

fact that there can be goods or services in respect of which a warranty may be

extended by the manufacturer or trader, and that there can also be goods

where no such warranty has been extended. The drafters have given foremost

recognition to the implied warranty that the Legislature is extending to all

consumers in terms of Section 32(1)(d), irrespective of whether there is a

written express warranty. The Legislature has been mindful that the implied

warranty should not deprive a consumer of a written warranty that he or she

may have got from the manufacturer or trader and has recognised such

written warranty, by the use of the word, otherwise. It is the view of this Court

that the use of the word or does not mean either and that every good shall

carry with it an implied warranty, and where a written warranty has been

offered, such written warranty as well. This position is confirmed by the fact

that Section 32(1) applies in respect of every contract for the supply of goods

or for the provision of services, thus leaving no ambiguity in this regard.

The argument of the learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioner that where

there is an express warranty, there cannot be an implied warranty can lead to

a situation where an unscrupulous manufacturer or trader extends a restrictive

written warranty and where there is a defect in a good, claim that it is not

liable to the consumer to rectify such defect beyond what has been extended

33

by the written warranty. Such an argument, if accepted, would be contrary to

the stated objectives of the CAA Act.

In light of the above, it would be wrong to hold that manufacturers or traders

can contract themselves out of liability arising from supplying defective

products by offering a limited warranty or by the inclusion of clauses to limit

liability. Such express warranties cannot give immunity to a manufacturer or

trader, contrary to the legal protection provided by the Legislature to protect

consumers. The CAA has a statutory duty to protect the consumer rights of the

citizens of Sri Lanka by ensuring that every vendor provides to every purchaser

a product of good quality. Thus, this Court is of the view that an implied

warranty, that goods supplied will be reasonably fit for the purpose for which

they are supplied, is the primary layer of protection provided by the legislature

for the benefit of the consumer, in line with the preamble24 of the Act and the

objects of the Authority, and such an implied warranty shall always be

available to a consumer, irrespective of a written warranty that may be given.

Hence, this Court cannot agree with the submission of the Petitioner that

where there is an express warranty, a consumer cannot have recourse to an

implied warranty provided by Sections 13(1), 13(4) and 32(1)(d) of the CAA Act.

24 Preamble of the Act reads as follows: WHEREAS it is the policy of the Government of Sri Lanka to provide for the better protection of consumers through the regulation of trade and the prices of goods and services and to protect traders and manufacturers against unfair trade practices and restrictive trade practices: AND WHEREAS the Government of Sri Lanka is also desirous of promoting competitive pricing wherever possible and ensure healthy competition among traders and manufacturers of goods and services.

34

Would the position be different where the Petitioner has complied with the

written warranty?

There is one other matter that this Court would like to consider, prior to

concluding its discussion on the second argument. That is the submission of

the learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioner that the Petitioner has

complied with the express warranty offered by it.

The fact that the Petitioner extended a written warranty to the 3rd Respondent

is undisputed. This Court has examined the said warranty annexed to the

petition marked P7 and observes the following:

a) KIA has warranted that the vehicle is new and that the vehicle is free from

defects in material or workmanship, subject to the terms and conditions

specified in P7.

b) The above warranty which extends to all components of the vehicle is

valid for a period of 36 months or 100,000km, whichever occurs first,

commencing from the date of first service.

c) The liability of KIA under the warranty is limited solely to the repair or

replacement of original parts defective in materials or workmanship, by

an authorised KIA dealer at its place of business.

d) The warranty does not include any expense for or related to

transportation to such a dealer or payment for loss of use of the KIA

Vehicle during warranty repairs.

Thus, KIA has warranted two important matters.

35

The first is that the vehicle supplied to the 3rd Respondent is a new vehicle.

Brand new means that the vehicle has not been driven on the road except en

route delivery and has not been registered by a licensing authority. There is no

dispute in this case that the vehicle had a zero mileage, had not been used by a

third party and has not been registered, except in Sri Lanka. Therefore, there is

no breach of the first aspect of the warranty.

The second is that the vehicle shall be free from defects in materials or

workmanship. The latter warranty however is limited to a KIA dealer making

the necessary repairs or replacing the defective part, or both.

What is therefore significant is that the warranty in P7 recognises that even

though the vehicle is brand new, it can develop problems or defects, and

therefore warrants that if problems or defects do occur, such problems or

defects will be identified and that such problems or defects will be repaired or

replaced. It is therefore clear that although the above warranty P7 holds out

that the vehicle shall be free from defects in material or workmanship, it is

subject to an important limitation. That is, in the event any defect occurs in the

vehicle during the warranty period, such defect would be repaired by the

manufacturers agent in this case, by the Petitioner free of charge, by

replacing the defective part, or carrying out the necessary repair. This would

be the remedy available under P7 to a person who purchases a brand new

vehicle, unless of course the defect in the vehicle is not capable of being

diagnosed or is not capable of being repaired, or the issues are multiple and

affects the safety, reliability and roadworthiness of the vehicle.

36

This Court has already outlined what occurred with the vehicle of the 3rd

Respondent. The issue, as this Court sees it, was that the radiator hose had not

been fitted properly or it had become loose. A consequence of this issue was

the discharge of the coolant. Any person acquainted with motor vehicles, and

certainly a vehicle agent such as the Petitioner would know that one of the

possible consequences of an engine overheating as a result of the vehicle

being used without coolant, is the possibility of damage to the gasket. At least

when the vehicle was brought in for repairs for the second time, the Petitioner

ought to have checked the root cause for the rise in temperature and whether

such rise in temperature could have a nexus to the initial problem of the

vehicle being used without coolant.

Be that as it may, what is important to consider is the fact that on each

occasion, the Petitioner did repair the issue that had arisen and thereby

honoured the written warranty P7. It is the position of the Petitioner that

after the gasket was replaced, the overheating issue had been resolved, and

the vehicle had been used by the 3rd Respondent. While it is possible that the

3rd Respondent may have been inconvenienced as a result of the said issue,

and that a vehicle with rising temperatures is not what the 3rd Respondent

expected when he took delivery of a new vehicle on 15th February 2012, this

Court takes the view that the Petitioner has honoured the warranty that was

extended by P7, and that the Petitioner is not in breach of its obligations in

terms of P7, as it has duly rectified the issue that arose during the period of

the warranty, free of charge. It is the view of this Court that this fact is crucial

in the determination of the relief that the CAA is empowered to provide in

terms of Section 13(4).

37

Conclusion

In the above circumstances, this Court is of the view that the 3rd Respondent is

entitled to the implied warranty that has been conferred on a consumer by the

CAA Act, in spite of being a beneficiary of the written warranty P7 and in spite

of the Petitioner having honoured the written warranty P7 by successfully

repairing the issue.

The third argument - is the decision that the vehicle is not reasonably fit,

unreasonable?

The next question that must be considered by this Court is whether (a) the

decision of the inquiry panel P18 contains sufficient and relevant material to

conclude that the vehicle sold to the 3rd Respondent was in violation of the

implied warranty under Section 32(1)(d) and if so, (b) whether the decision of

the inquiry panel that the Petitioner has breached that implied warranty is

reasonable.

Implied warranty in terms of Section 32(1) of the CAA Act

The starting point in considering whether the Petitioner has breached the

implied warranty in Section 32(1) is to set out what constitutes a warranty or

guarantee given by implication in respect of goods. Section 32(1) of the Act,

which deals with implied warranties in relation to the supply of goods and

services, reads as follows:

In every contract for the supply of goods or for the provision of services

by any person in the course of a business of supply of such goods or

38

provisions of such services to a consumer, there is an implied warranty

that

(a) the services will be provided with due care and skill;

(b) that any materials supplied in connection with provision of such

services will be reasonably fit for the purpose for which they are

supplied;

(c) the goods supplied or services provided will be in conformity with the

standards and specifications determined under section 12 of this Act;

and

(d) the goods supplied will be reasonably fit for the purpose for which

they are supplied.

If the provisions of Section 32(1)(d) are interpolated into Section 13(4), it

would read as follows - Where after an inquiry into a complaint, the Authority

is of opinion that a sale has been made of any goods which are not reasonably

fit for the purpose for which they are supplied, the CAA has the power to order

the manufacturer or trader (a) to pay compensation to the aggrieved party, or

(b) to replace such goods, or (c) to refund the amount paid for such goods or

the provision of such service, as the case may be.

The two-tiered approach

It is the view of this Court that in order to provide the above relief, Section

13(4) of the CAA Act requires the 1st Respondent to adopt a two-tiered

approach.

39

Firstly, the Authority has to form an opinion after an inquiry that a

manufacture or sale has been made of any goods not conforming to any

warranty or guarantee given by implication or otherwise by the manufacturer

or trader. In this application, this provision, when read together with Section

32(1)(d), means that the CAA must form the opinion that the goods are not

reasonably fit for the purpose for which they are supplied.

Secondly, if and when such an opinion is formed, the CAA has the power to

order the manufacturer or trader to pay compensation, replace the goods or

refund the amount paid.

While each of these two issues will be discussed later, this Court must state at

this point that at each of the above two tiers, the CAA must act reasonably and

rationally, with due appreciation of the duties and responsibilities conferred on

it by the CAA Act. Thus, while the decision reached at each of the above stages

must not be illegal or ultra vires, and should be arrived at after adhering to the

applicable procedure, the decisions must not be unreasonable in a

Wednesbury sense.

What is meant by reasonably fit?

The first tier of Section 13(4) requires the Authority to consider whether there

has in fact been a breach of the implied warranty afforded to the 3rd

Respondent as per Section 32(1)(d).

The wording of Section 32(1)(d) illustrates the fact that the Legislature was

conscious of the need to provide for defects that might arise in any product

that is sold to a consumer, new or otherwise. If the wording in the CAA Act was

40

for the goods that are sold to be free from any defects or to be in perfect

condition, an aggrieved consumer may even succeed in a claim where there is

a very minute and even negligible cosmetic defect on a product sold to them.

Instead, the standard expected is reasonable fitness for the purpose for which

it is supplied.

This Court shall now consider what is captured by goods supplied will be

reasonably fit for the purpose for which they are supplied. The learned

Presidents Counsel for the Petitioner has quite correctly submitted that there

is no definition of the term reasonably fit in the Act, and that leaving it open

can lead to different members of the CAA taking different views on what is

reasonably fit. This Court is in agreement with this submission. However, this

Court takes the view that it is almost impossible to set out an exhaustive list of

guidelines to be used by the CAA that can be taken into account across the

board in deciphering what constitutes reasonably fit for the purpose for which

a good is supplied. The phrase reasonably fit is not meant to be read in

isolation but as the section itself makes it clear, must be decided according to

the purpose for which it is supplied. As such, it is the view of this Court that

each case must be considered on its unique facts and circumstances because

the concept of reasonable fitness will differ with varying circumstances.

Of course, as noted earlier, any conclusion that the CAA may reach in this

regard must be rational and must reach the threshold of reasonableness that

now stands alone as a ground for judicial review. Whether a decision is

reasonable is a matter that this Court, in the exercise of its Writ jurisdiction can

consider, apart from examining the vires of the decision and whether due

process has been followed. This is the safeguard that is available to a

41

manufacturer or trader against an unreasonable, arbitrary or irrational

decision of the CAA.

What is a reasonably fit motor vehicle?

In the context of motor vehicles, general roadworthiness at the point of sale

would be the standard of reasonable fitness, unless the motor vehicle is

intended for a particular purpose which is duly communicated to the seller, in

which case the threshold may need to match the criteria duly communicated

to the seller. Thus, this Court takes the view that any defect that may affect

the basic and core function of the vehicle, and thereby affect the purpose for

which the vehicle was supplied i.e. as the Petitioner puts it, to serve as a

motorable mode of conveyance25 - could render the vehicle not reasonably fit

for the purpose for which it is supplied.

The standard of reasonable fitness for a particular class of good, in this case

motor vehicles, too can vary. For instance, the legislature could not possibly

have intended the same standard of reasonable fitness to be applied to brand

new vehicles as well as to second hand vehicles. This distinction has been

referred to by Lord Denning M.R. in Bartlett v. Sidney Marcus Ltd26 where he

held that:

A buyer should realise that when he buys a secondhand car defects may

appear sooner than later; and, in the absence of an express warranty, he

has no redress.27 Even when he buys from a dealer the most he can require

25 Paragraph 57(a) of the written submissions of the Petitioner. 26[1965] 1 WLR 1013 at page 1017. 27 The situation in Sri Lanka would be different in view of the provisions of Sections 13(4) and 32(1)(d).

42

is that it should be reasonably fit for that purpose of being driven along

the road.

The above passage recognises the fact that brand new vehicles too can

develop defects, but later as opposed to sooner when compared with used

vehicles, and explains why the warranty on a brand new vehicle is limited by

time and mileage, whichever comes first.

Lord Denning M.R. thereafter went on to state that:

This car came up to that requirement. The plaintiff drove the car away

himself. It seemed to be running smoothly. He drove it for four weeks

before he put it into the garage to have the clutch repaired. Then more

work was necessary than he anticipated. But that does not mean that, at

the time of sale, it was not fit for use as a car. I do not think that, on the

judges findings, there was any evidence of a breach of the implied

conditions. (emphasis added)28

Reasonable fitness for a reasonable period

This Court recognises that in determining reasonable fitness for which a good

is supplied, due weight must be given to the condition of the good at the point

of sale. In the case of Crowther v. Shannon Motor Co,29 Denning M.R. once

again placed due emphasis on the time of sale when he stated as follows:

Some criticism was made of a phrase used by the judge. He said what

does fit for purpose mean? He answered: To go as a car for a

28 Supra; page 1017. 29 [1975] 1 WLR 30 at page 33.

43

reasonable time. I am not quite sure that that is entirely accurate. The

relevant time is the time of sale. But there is no doubt what the judge

meant. If the car does not go for a reasonable time but the engine breaks

up within a short time, that is evidence which goes to show it was not

reasonably fit for the purpose at the time it was sold. On the evidence in

this case, the engine was liable to go at any time. It was nearing the

point of failure, said the expert Mr. Wise. The time interval was merely

staving off the inevitable. That shows that at the time of the sale it was

not reasonably fit for the purpose of being driven on the road.

The relevant time being the time of sale does not however mean that a seller

can exclude itself from any liability arising out of a defect that the vehicle may

face within a reasonable time period, and accordingly, such time period in

which the issue arose has to be given due consideration in determining

reasonable fitness.

In Lexmead (Basingstoke) Ltd. v Lewis and Others30 it was held that:

The implied warranty of fitness for a particular purpose relates to the

goods at the time of delivery under the contract of sale in the state in

which they were delivered. I do not doubt that it is a continuing warranty

that the goods will continue to be fit for that purpose for a reasonable

time after delivery, so long as they remain in the same apparent state as

that in which they were delivered, apart from normal wear and tear.

30 [1982] AC 225 at page 276; Lord Diplock.

44

Rescission of a contract and damages

It is common knowledge that a vehicle consists of several components. A

failure in the radio system of a vehicle does not render the vehicle not usable

nor does the failure of the central locking system make the vehicle not usable.

A failure in the engine or the transmission however would render the vehicle

not roadworthy. Thus, a minor issue which could be remedied will not entitle

the buyer to rescind the contract while a major issue which affects the

roadworthiness of the vehicle and which cannot be repaired will allow the

buyer to rescind. This reflects the principles of the law of Contract, as set out in

The Law of Contracts by Weeramantry where he has stated as follows:31

According to the trend of modern decisions the test to be applied in

deciding the rights of parties where there is a failure to perform

obligations undertaken by contract is whether the particular stipulation

goes to the root of the contract, to the foundation of the whole. If a

failure to perform would render the performance of the rest of the

contract by the party in default a thing differing in substance from what

the other party has stipulated for, the other party would be discharged but

not where it merely partially affects the contract and may be

compensated for in damages.32

Contracts for the sale of goods afford convenient illustrations of

performance in part, and in this connection reference must be made to

section 31(2) of the Sale of Goods Ordinance which provides that it is a

question in each case depending on the terms of the contract and the

31 Page 882. 32Kandiah v. Kandasamy [1958] 61 NLR 434 at 436.

45

circumstances of the case, whether the breach of contract is a repudiation

of the whole contract, or whether it is a severable breach

The circumstances of each case must determine whether the breach is so

fundamental as to go to the root of the contract. Two particular aspects

that are of much assistance in deciding such matters are, first, the ratio

quantitatively which the breach bears to the contract as a whole, and

secondly, the degree of probability or improbability that such a breach will

be repeated.

Thus, while a breach so fundamental that it goes to the root of the contract

may entitle the innocent party to rescind the contract, such party would only

be entitled for damages for any other breach. This Court takes the view that

the equivalent of the right to a replacement or refund under the CAA Act is the

right to rescind under the general law, while the equivalent of damages is

compensation under the CAA Act.

It would perhaps be appropriate to consider at this juncture several judicial

decisions where courts have rescinded the contract and ordered the vehicle to

be returned on the basis that the said vehicle was not reasonably fit, as

opposed to granting damages or compensation.

In the unreported case of Spencer v. Claude Rye (Vehicles) Ltd 33 the plaintiff

who was a Barrister had purchased a new Triumph Vitesse from the

Defendant company. The vehicle had problems from the start and the plaintiff

brought an action for rescission and damages almost 18 months after

33The Guardian, 19th December 1972, as cited in, M Whincup, Reasonable Fitness of Cars, The Modern Law Review, Volume 38 (1975) page 660 at page 661.

46

purchase. The day after delivery the throttle cable broke and the car had to be

towed back to the garage. It was returned to the defendant with assorted

defects twelve times over a period of several months. The Trial Judge had

observed that the serious matter was its tendency to overheat. All the other

complaints may well have been very irritating, but all were eventually cured

and did not amount to sufficient reason for him to reject the car. The problem

of the boiling radiator however was not repaired, so much so that one witness

had said that the only way to solve the mystery of the boiling radiator was to

saw the cylinder block in half. Croom-Johnson J, held that If the car was in

that condition it was clearly not fit for its purpose. If it had been offered for sale

with a label indicating it was liable to boil every hundred miles or so for a

reason that nobody could discover I could not see anyone buying it- except

perhaps in the interests of motor research or for scrap value.

However, in spite of the said observation, the trial Judge had only awarded

damages. The threshold adopted for reasonable fitness in Spencer and its

failure to consider that very irritating complaints might well cause a vehicle to

not be reasonably fit, has been subject to some criticism.34 This Court is of the

view that while factors such as the inability to detect and hence, repair the

problem may be useful in justifying the relief that is given to a complainant, in

determining reasonable fitness, irritants which would disrupt the core function

34 M Whincup, Reasonable Fitness of Cars (Supra) at page 661: A car whose engine seizes up every 100 miles is obviously useless. In themselves, therefore, the judgment and the ratio are unexceptionable. What is put forward here as the most significant aspect of the case, however, is the principle stated in the italicised passage above on the general standard of fitness of new cars. On the face of it a car must be accepted as reasonably fit if it goes satisfactorily, as distinct from perfectly. Mechanical deficiencies of some sort are inevitable. But when a new vehicle immediately develops a number of very irritating defects such as a broken throttle cable, necessitating its return to the garage on 12 occasions with all the consequential loss and inconvenience, it might seem thereby to be so unsatisfactory as to be intolerable. Mr. Justice Croom-Johnsons dictum suggests clearly that he rejects this view and to that extent his judgment seems actually against the interests of consumers at large. If his remarks state the law correctly, then with respect it must be said that the law accepts depressingly and unnecessarily low standards of workmanship and performance.

47

of the vehicle would be adequate to fail the test of reasonable fitness.

This Court will now consider the judgment in Farnworth Finance Facilities

Limited v. Attryde and another35 which involved the sale of a new Royal

Enfield motor cycle. The motor cycle had to be returned twice to the suppliers

and once to the manufacturers for a wide range of complaints to be remedied.

After four months the purchaser rejected it. Lord Denning M.R. said that the

condition of reasonable fitness meant that the machine should be

roadworthy and added the machine in this case was expressly described as

new, which adds emphasis to the implied terms. A new motor cycle should at

any rate be a workmanlike motor cycle which is safe to be used on the

roads.36

Lord Denning M.R. went onto state as follows:

There were clearly breaches of those implied terms. But were the

breaches fundamental? Were they such as to preclude the finance

company from relying on the printed conditions which purported to

exclude their liability?

Any defect is serious if it is likely to cause an accident or to render the

vehicle unsafe on the road. It may be easily remediable, yet until it is

remedied it is a serious defect. There were defects here which very nearly

caused accidents... a pannier fell off and caused the machine to slide

about the road. A headlight failed at night and at speed because the dip

switch was corroded. After the return from the makers the machine was

still unstable at high speeds. ..The headlights failed twice more at night 35 [1970] 1 WLR 1053. 36 Ibid. at page 1058.

48

and at speed owing to the terminals coming off the wires. The lubricating

system was still at fault. Finally the rear chain broke. It was only by good

fortune that there was not a serious accident. All these add up to a

congeries of defects. In those circumstances, I think the breaches were

fundamental...37

Atkinson L.J. agreed, saying that this was undoubtedly a thoroughly

unsatisfactory machine. . . [It] really was not a workable machine upon the

road.38

In the case of Lightburn v. Belmont Sales Ltd39 the plaintiff bought a new Ford

Cortina which, as Ruttan J. put it, he found he could not rely on from one hour

to the next. In the eight months following the sale of the car, it had to be

towed back to the sellers garage twice and returned a total of 17 times, due to

continuous trouble with the electrical system. It never started easily, and the

battery frequently went flat. The battery had to be recharged three times in

one week and on one occasion the engine died while the car was moving.

There were other miscellaneous troubles such as a cracked oil pump and oil

leaks, which were rectified. The judge ordered rescission of the contract after

holding as follows I conclude that the defendant was in breach of a

fundamental term of the contract to purchase a motor car of workable

character capable of giving a sustained reliable performance throughout the

year. . . It can hardly be said [the plaintiff] had reasonable use of the motor

vehicle, for its continued operation was uncertain and a steady cause of

worry.

37Ibid; at page 1059. 38 Ibid; at page 1060. 39 (1969) 6 D.L.R (3d) 692; decision of the Supreme Court of British Columbia referred to in M Whincup, Reasonable Fitness of Cars; Supra, at page 664.

49

It would therefore be seen that in Lightburn, the plaintiffs claim was upheld

primarily because the vehicle was completely unreliable, as opposed to the

vehicle being unsafe or dangerous to run, as in Farnworth.

In Gibbons v. Trapp Motors40, the plaintiff purchased a new automobile, a

Pontiac convertible, which developed problems soon after. Over 30 hours

repair time was required in the first 10 months, followed by a period of 10 days

during which the car was to be brought once and for all to reasonable running

order. But even that lengthy treatment failed to deal with its many

(unspecified) weaknesses in steering and roadability [and] reliability.

Although the issue was partly one of safety, it seems clear from the reasoning

of Gould J that repeated loss of use and unreliability were the main factors,

which prompted him to order that the purchase price be refunded.

This Court observes that in each of the above cases, the courts held that the

contract was liable to be rescinded and therefore the consumer was able to

reject the car because the vehicle did not reach the threshold of reasonable

fitness. This Court is of the view that the threshold for reasonable fitness

adopted in these cases would justify a replacement of the vehicle if the two-

tiered approach under Section 13(4) was adopted. This aspect would be

discussed later on in this judgment.

In Future Automobiles (Private) Limited Vs. Consumer Affairs Authority of Sri

Lanka and Others41 the 2nd respondent complained about various defects of

the vehicle when the vehicle had a mileage of about 30,000km. When the

40[1970] 9 D.L.R (3d) 742 referring to Pollock v Mucrae [1913] 60 Scot LR - as cited in M Whincup, Reasonable Fitness of Cars; Supra at page 665. 41 CA (Writ) Application No. 26/2016; CA Minutes of 18th February 2019.

50

vehicle had a mileage of about 40,000km and still under warranty, the

petitioner admitted the replacement of inter alia the Transmission Solenoid

Control Body, Fuel Gauge etc. The Transmission Solenoid Control Body is said

to be the nerve center of the transmission, the failure of which directly affects

the operation of the vehicle. This Court held that the above rendered the

vehicle not reasonably fit for the purpose for which it was supplied and went

on to hold that the decision taken by the CAA to replace the vehicle was not

unreasonable. However, in that case, the petitioner sought to exclude

themselves from the warranty, and unlike the Petitioner in this application, did

not repair the defect. This is a factor that would be relevant in considering the

relief that could be granted.

The above cases demonstrate two very important matters.

The first is, it is not the number of issues that decide whether a brand new

vehicle is not reasonably fit. What is required for a vehicle to be classified as

not being reasonably fit is for the issue, multiple or otherwise, to affect the

core function of the vehicle and render the vehicle unfit for use on the road.

The second is that the rescission of a contract or the replacement of the

vehicle on the basis that it is not reasonably fit requires the vehicle to be

completely unroadworthy and incapable of repair.

The test for deciding the reasonableness of a decision of a Public Authority

In considering whether the decision of the Inquiry Panel that the vehicle was

not reasonably fit for the purpose for which it was intended is reasonable in

the light of what was discussed above, this Court shall be mindful of the fact

51

that it is not the duty of this Court acting in the exercise of its Writ jurisdiction,

to assess whether the implied warranty was breached. The duty of this Court is

to determine whether the Inquiry Panel, in deciding that the implied warranty

was breached, paid due regard to relevant matters and whether the decision

of the Inquiry Panel is reasonable.

In exercising judicial review, Courts play a limited role and must be mindful not

to substitute its own decision for that of the public authority who has been

conferred with the power of making that decision, unless the authority has

disregarded material facts or where the decision is unsupported by substantial

evidence. In the words of Lord Bingham, they (judges) are auditors of legality;

no more, but no less.42

This Court shall bear in mind the following two passages from Administrative

Law by Wade and Forsyth:43

The doctrine that powers must be exercised reasonably has to be

reconciled with the no less important doctrine that the court must not

usurp the discretion of the public authority..

Decisions which are extravagant or capricious cannot be legitimate. But if

the decision is within the confines of reasonableness, it is no part of the

courts function to look further into its merits.

As Lord Hailsham L.C. has observed, two reasonable persons can perfectly

reasonably come to opposite conclusions on the same set of facts without

42 Tom Bingham, The Rule of Law [2011] Penguin Books at page 61. 43 Supra; page 302.

52

forfeiting their title to be regarded as reasonable.44 Similarly Lord Diplock has

observed that, the very concept of administrative discretion involves a right to

choose between more than one possible course of action upon which there is

room for reasonable people to hold differing opinions as to which is to be

preferred. 45

As such, the test to be applied is not what a court of law thinks or considers is

reasonable nor what the proverbial Man on the Clapham Omnibus would

consider reasonable. Instead, it is settled law that in considering the validity of

the exercise of discretionary power, the Court will consider whether the power

has been properly used, or whether the authority has abused its discretion.

The test routinely applied for this purpose is the test set out in Associated

Provincial Picture Houses, Limited v. Wednesbury Corporation,46 where Lord

Greene defined unreasonableness as something so absurd that no sensible

person could ever dream that it lay within the powers of the authority. The

famous example of the red-haired teacher who was dismissed due to the

colour of her hair, illustrates the high threshold for unreasonableness that

was expected to justify judicial intervention on this ground.

Subsequently, in Council of Civil Service Unions v Minister for the Civil

Service47 [the GCHQ Case], Lord Diplock, having classified the three grounds on

which administrative action is subject to judicial control, crystallised

44 Re W (an infant) [1971] AC 682 at 700. 45 Secretary of State for Education and Science v Tameside Metropolitan Borough Council [1977] AC 1014 at 1064. 46 [1948] 1 K.B. 223 at pages 229 - 230. 47 Supra; at pages 410-411.

53

irrationality as a standalone ground for judicial review.48 The ground of

irrationality however was intrinsically linked to Wednesbury unreasonableness,

and only applied to a decision which is so outrageous in its defiance of logic or

of accepted moral standards that no sensible person who had applied his mind

to the question to be decided could have arrived at it, thus keeping the

threshold for judicial intervention still very high.49

A similar threshold was adopted by Lord Scarman50 who referred to a need to

demonstrate that the guidance of the Secretary of State in that case were so

absurd that he must have taken leave of his senses in order to justify judicial

intervention.

A common feature in the abovementioned cases is that for Courts to

intervene, the decision of the public authority in question must not just be

unreasonable, but manifestly unreasonable. There is however growing

precedence to show that English Courts have attempted to reduce the rigour

of Wednesbury unreasonableness over the years, particularly in light of the

Human Rights Act 1998 which incorporated European Convention on Human

Rights into English domestic law.51

The default position, however, as noted in De Smiths Judicial Review,52 is

still, at the time of writing, that of the Wednesbury formulation, although it has

48 The test laid down by Diplock, J has been applied in Sri Lanka as far back as in 1987 see Sudhakaran v. Bharathi and Others [1987] 2 Sri LR 243, at page 254. 49 Although the terms, irrationality and unreasonableness are often used interchangeably, irrationality is only one facet of unreasonableness. 50 Nottinghamshire County Council v. Secretary of State for the Environment [1986] AC 240 at 247. 51 See R v Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex parte Daly [2001] 3 All ER 433 page 447. 52 Harry Woolf, Jeffery Jowell, Catherine Donnelly, Ivan Hare, De Smiths Judicial Review [8th Edition, 2018] Sweet and Maxwell, page 648.

54

been reformulated to a standard that requires the decision maker to act within

the range of reasonable responses.53

The varying application of the Wednesbury principles or irrationality

demonstrates that the Courts are more concerned with ensuring that a correct

decision is taken with due regard to the context. The Wednesbury standard is

thus not monolithic54.

The case of Secretary of State for Education and Science v Tameside

Metropolitan Borough Council,55 decided prior to the GCHQ case provides for

what can be considered a more balanced test:

In public law, unreasonable as descriptive of the way in which a public

authority has purported to exercise a discretion vested in it by statute has

become a term of legal art. To fall within this expression it must be

conduct which no sensible authority acting with due appreciation of its

responsibilities would have decided to adopt.56

Authorities acting on behalf of the public ought to be accountable for the

overall quality of the decision making process. This Court is therefore of the

view that Courts must take an active and more effective approach in fulfilling

its function of probing the quality of decisions and ensuring that assertions

made by public authorities are properly substantiated, justified, and strike a

fair balance between parties. With that in mind, it is the view of this Court that

53 In Boddington v. British Transport Police [[1998] UKHL 13]; [1999] 2 AC 143] it was held that it is sufficient for a decision to be within the range of reasonable decisions open to a decision-maker. 54 Wade and Forsyth, supra; page 304. 55 Supra; page 1064. 56 The test used in Tameside was cited with approval in the case of R v Chief Constable of Sussex (Ex parte International Traders Ferry Ltd) [[1999] 1 All ER 129 at page 157].

55

the time has come for our Courts to apply the less tortuous test laid down in

Tameside, in applications such as this, where the decision, if not complied

with, can result in proceedings in the Magistrates Court for enforcement.57

Is the decision of the Inquiry Panel reasonable?

This Court shall now consider whether the inquiry panel acted reasonably

when it arrived at the conclusion that the vehicle was not reasonably fit for the

purpose for which it was supplied.

There is no dispute between the parties that an issue arose on the very first

day of use. Though the consequential damage caused by the loose radiator

hose was successfully repaired, and the vehicle did not have any issue

thereafter and was thus roadworthy, the fact remains that at the point of sale,

the motor vehicle had a loose radiator hose, which eventually affected its core

function. It is common ground that a vehicle that overheats cannot be used on

a road, and to that extent, the vehicle was not roadworthy. Thus, it could be

reasonably concluded in the above circumstances, that the brand new vehicle

that was sold and delivered to the 3rd Respondent, even though it did not have

any defect with its major components, was not roadworthy at the point of sale

due to the radiator hose not having been tightened properly. Very significantly,

the subsequent issues that arose, namely the discharge of the coolant, the

overheating and the replacement of the gasket, were all as a result of a hose

not being tightened properly, and not due to any structural or inherent defect

in the vehicle.

57 Vide Section 13(6) of the Act.

56

It is in the light of the above factual circumstances that the inquiry panel

arrived at a finding that the vehicle was not reasonably fit for the purpose for

which it was supplied. This Court must state that the findings of the Inquiry

Panel are not clear as this Court would have liked it to be, nor does it appear to

have considered the provisions of Section 32(1)(d) in the manner that it should

have. Nonetheless, this Court is of the view that the said finding is a reasonable

decision in view of the facts of this application, and there was no other

conclusion that the Inquiry Panel could have reached in light of the facts and

material placed before it. It is not a finding which can be called irrational in the

GCHQ sense, nor is it a decision which is Wednesbury unreasonable. On the

contrary, this Court takes the view that it is a decision which a sensible person

acting with due appreciation of its responsibilities would have arrived at.

The fourth argument - Is the decision to replace the vehicle, unreasonable

and/or disproportionate?

This Court shall now proceed to consider the final argument of the learned

Presidents Counsel for the Petitioner that the Inquiry Panel acted

unreasonably when it held that the vehicle must be replaced, and that in any

event, the relief granted is completely disproportionate when compared with

the issue that the vehicle faced.

Are brand new vehicles free of defects?

A statement that a brand new vehicle can have defects might in the first

instance sound ludicrous. However, the reality is that it would be humanly

impossible, and even beyond the capability of robots that are used in the

manufacturing process, to manufacture vehicle after vehicle that shall have no

57

defects, either at the point of sale or during the period of its warranty. While in

recent times, with the technological advances that have been made, the motor

industry has seen manufacturers extending warranties for longer periods and

over higher mileages, thereby demonstrating that the vehicles that are

manufactured now are of a better quality than before, the fact remains that a

vehicle can nonetheless develop issues. In fact, it is for this precise reason that

manufacturers provide the warranty i.e. if defects do occur during such

period, such defects would be repaired.

The learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioner has drawn the attention of

this Court to several mass scale recalls of motor vehicles across the world

whenever a defect is discovered, in support of his three fold argument, that:

(a) A brand new vehicle can develop defects;

(b) In such situations, repair of such defects as opposed to the replacement

of that vehicle with a brand new vehicle, is the solution; and

(c) That such defects are never considered to be a defect rendering the

manufacturer liable to replace the entire motor vehicle.58

It would perhaps be appropriate to consider some of the examples of vehicle

recalls cited in the written submissions of the Petitioner, as it would shed light

on the approach of vehicle manufacturers in dealing with defects. That is of

course not to state that this Court accepts that a vehicle manufacturer should

never replace a defective motor vehicle, whatever the extent of the defect

may be.

58 Vide paragraph 31 of the Written Submissions of the Petitioner.

58

The first example is where the brake pressure accumulator fixed on two hybrid

models, the Toyota Prius and the Lexus HS 250H had developed fatigue cracks

due to vibration. These vehicles had been recalled and replaced with an

improved brake booster pump assembly.

The second instance is where Toyota, having received reports of crashes,

injuries and deaths arising from a defective parking brake had recalled 340,000

units of its Prius 2016 model, and carried out the necessary repairs.

The third example is where Mercedes Benz had recalled 132167 vehicles to

rectify a defective passenger side air bag which had the tendency to rupture

upon being activated during a crash, causing metal fragments to come through

the air bag and injure the occupants.

Thus, when an issue is discovered in a brand new vehicle, the answer is not to

rush in and replace the said vehicle with a new vehicle, where the

circumstances do not warrant it. This Court is of the view that when a brand

new vehicle develops an issue, a more balanced and cautious approach needs

to be adopted. In other words, what this Court is saying is that the CAA must

act reasonably, and in proportion to the issue that had arisen. That is not to

say that a new vehicle with multiple defects which is not roadworthy and

which cannot be repaired must be tolerated by a consumer, as evidenced by

the cases that were discussed earlier. If this Court is to reiterate, in deciding

what relief is to be afforded, the Authority must act reasonably and

proportionately.

59

Section 13(4) confers upon the CAA discretion with regard to the relief

A consideration of this final argument requires this Court to examine the

second tier of Section 13(4), in terms of which, once the Authority has arrived

at the opinion that a sale has been made of any goods not reasonably fit for

the purpose for which it was supplied, it has to decide whether relief should be

afforded to the consumer, and if so, what that relief is.

As already noted, in terms of Section 13(4), the CAA has three options. They

are:

1. To order the manufacturer or trader to pay compensation to the

aggrieved party;

2. To replace such goods; or

3. To refund the amount paid for such goods or the provision of such

service,

as the case may be.

The words as the case may be essentially means according to the

circumstances and the said words therefore demonstrates that the CAA has a

discretion with regard to the relief that it can grant to the consumer. In the

case of Micro Cars Ltd vs. Consumer Affairs Authority and Others59, Justice

Vijith Malalgoda, P.C., P/CA (as he then was) referring to the above portion of

Section 13(4) held that, When considering the said provisions it is our view

that the said provision has given discretion to the tribunal to consider as to how

59 Supra.

60

they are going to compensate the aggrieved party considering the facts of each

case or as referred to in the act itself "as the case may be.

The exercise of the discretion by the CAA

This Court must of course state that there is nothing called absolute or

unfettered discretion, and that every exercise of discretion is subject to

review.60

The manner in which the discretion should be exercised was discussed by this

Court in Benedict and Others vs. Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri

Lanka and Others61 where it was held as follows:

This court does not dispute that the first respondent has a discretion in

the matter. However, it is a discretion that has to be exercised reasonably,

fairly and justly. As Lord Diplock said the administrative discretion

involves a right to choose between more than one possible course of

action upon which there is room for reasonable people to hold differing

opinions as to which is to be preferred. Secretary of State for Education

v. Tameside Metropolitan B.C. The valid exercise of a discretion requires

a genuine application of the mind and a conscious choice by the first

respondent. The effect of the Monetary Law Act is not to set up the court

as an arbiter of the correctness of one view over the other. It is the first

respondent alone who can take such a decision and, provided the first

respondent acts fairly and reasonably within the four corners of its lawful

jurisdiction, this court in my opinion cannot interfere. Accordingly, it

60 See Premachandra vs Major Montague Jayawikrama and another (Provincial Governors case); [1994] 2 Sri L.R. 90, at page 101, per Chief Justice G.P.S. De Silva. 61 [2003] 3 Sri L.R. 68 (Pramuka Bank case), at page 75.

61

follows, that the court can examine the exercise of the discretionary

power in order to see whether it has been used properly, fairly and

according to the rules of reason and justice. (emphasis added).

The CAA must at all times remember that there are two parties before it, and

that the rights and interests of both parties must be considered equally. It

would be appropriate to refer to at this stage, the approach our Courts have

adopted with regard to the powers of an arbitrator appointed under the

Industrial Disputes Act in order to demonstrate the approach that the CAA

ought to have adopted. In doing so, this Court is mindful that the Industrial

Disputes Act specifically requires an arbitrator to act in a just and equitable

manner, whereas the CAA Act does not contain such a provision. Nonetheless,

it is the view of this Court that the CAA must strike a fair balance between the

rights of the consumer and the rights of the trader when arriving at its

decision.

In Municipal Council Colombo vs. Munasinghe62 it was held by Chief Justice

H.N.G.Fernando as follows:

I hold that when the Industrial Disputes Act confers on an Arbitrator the

discretion to make an award which is 'just and equitable', the Legislature

did not intend to confer on an Arbitrator the freedom of a wild horse. An

award must be 'just and equitable' as between the parties to a dispute;

and the fact that one party might have encountered 'hard times' because

of personal circumstances for which the other party is in no way

responsible is not a ground on which justice or equity requires the other

party to make undue concessions. In addition, it is time that this Court 62 71 NLR 223 at page 225. Referred to with approval in Standard Chartered Grindlays Bank Limited vs The Minister of Labour [SC Appeal No. 22/2003; SC Minutes of 4th April 2008].

62

should correct what seems to be a prevalent misconception. The mandate

which the Arbitrator in an industrial dispute holds under the law requires

him to make an award which is just and equitable, and not necessarily an

award which favours an employee. An Arbitrator holds no license from the

Legislature to make any such award as he may please, for nothing is just

and equitable which is decided by whim or caprice or by the toss of a

double-headed coin.

In Ceylon Tea Plantations Company Limited vs. Ceylon Estate Staff Union,63

Rajaratnam, J opined that, A just and equitable order must be fair by all

parties. It never means the safeguarding of the interest of the workman alone.

The Supreme Court, in Singer Industries (Ceylon) Limited vs. The Ceylon

Mercantile Industrial and General Workers Union and others64 agreeing with

the observations in Municipal Council Colombo vs. Munasinghe65 held as

follows:

It is a cardinal principle of law that in making an award by an arbitrator

there must be a judicial and objective approach and more importantly the

perspectives both of employer as well as the employee should be

considered in a balanced manner and undoubtedly just and equity must

apply to both these parties.

Thus, it is the view of this Court that the CAA does not have the freedom of the

wild horse when taking decisions and that it must always remain within the

four corners of its lawful jurisdiction.

63 SC Appeal 211/72; SC Minutes of 15th May 1974. 64 [2010] 1 Sri L.R. 66. 65 Supra.

63

Relevant and Irrelevant considerations

The submission of the learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioner that the

decision of the Inquiry Panel that the Petitioner must replace the vehicle of the

3rd Respondent with a brand new vehicle is unreasonable, irrational and

arbitrary, is two-fold; the first is the failure by the Inquiry Panel to take into

consideration relevant factors; the second is that its decision is not supported

by the material that was placed before the inquiry panel.

The following passages from De Smiths Judicial Review capture the essence of

the above argument:66

A decision is irrational in the strict sense of that term if it is unreasoned; if

it is lacking ostensible logic or comprehensible justification. Instances of

irrational decisions include those made in arbitrary fashion, perhaps by

spinning a coin or consulting an astrologer67. In such cases claimant does

not have to prove that the decision was so bizarre that its author must

have been temporarily unhinged, but merely that the decision simply fails

to add up in which, in other words, there is an error of reasoning which

robs the decision of logic68.

Absurd or perverse decisions may be presumed to have been decided

in that fashion, as may decisions where the given reasons are simply

unintelligible. Less extreme examples of the irrational decision include

those in which there is an absence of logical connection between the

66 Supra; pages 604 and 613. 67 R v. Deputy Industrial Injuries Commissioner, Ex P. Moore [1965] 1 Q.B. 456 at 488 (Diplock LJ). 68 R v. Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration, Ex P. Balchin [1998] 1 P.L.R. 1.

64

evidence and the ostensible reasons for the decision, where the reasons

display no adequate justification for the decision, or where there is

absence of evidence in support of the decision.

Our view is that a material mistake or disregard of a material fact in and

of itself renders a decision irrational or unreasonable. .... it should be

presumed that Parliament intended public authorities rationally to relate

the evidence and their reasoning to the decision which they are charged

with making. The taking into account of a mistaken fact can just as easily

be absorbed into a traditional legal ground of review by referring to the

taking into account of an irrelevant consideration; or the failure to provide

reasons that are adequate or intelligible, or the failure to base the

decision upon any or adequate evidence.

The reasons for the decision of the Inquiry Panel

The conclusions reached by the inquiry panel in P18, which prompted their

decision to replace the vehicle, can be summarised as follows:

1. The motor vehicle purchased by the 3rd Respondent, was defective from

the date of purchase and the defects have been accepted by the

Petitioner;

2. The Applicant was denied the use of a defect-free vehicle from the date of

purchase;

3. After informing the Petitioner of the defect from the date of purchase of

the said vehicle, the said vehicle was repaired on four instances but the

issue was not rectified;

65

4. The gasket in the said defective motor vehicle was replaced by the

Defendant Company and the said replacement deteriorated the value of

the vehicle as a whole;

5. The Applicant has lost confidence in the said vehicle as it has been

defective on multiple occasions since the date of purchase within the

Warranty period;

6. Having to take the motor vehicle for repairs affected the professional

duties of the Applicant and he thus suffered a great loss as a result of this.

Failure to take into consideration relevant matters

Even though the above conclusions have been reached, the Inquiry Panel has

failed to consider the two most important factors that were placed before the

Inquiry Panel by the Petitioner the first being that the vehicle was

successfully repaired by the Petitioner and was thereafter roadworthy; and the

second being that the 3rd Respondent had not produced any material to show

that the vehicle was unusable after the gasket was replaced.

The inquiry panel has completely lost sight of the fact that on each occasion

the vehicle was brought in, the Petitioner repaired the vehicle free of charge,

thus honouring the written warranty P7 extended by it at the point of sale.

What is most important is the fact that according to the material produced

before the CAA, the vehicle was useable and roadworthy after the gasket was

replaced. With the issues arising from the faulty radiator hose having been

rectified, the vehicle was reasonably fit for the purpose for which it was

supplied. It is the position of the Petitioner that the fact that the 3rd

66

Respondent requested for an extension of the warranty is ample evidence to

show that the vehicle was in fact roadworthy after the gasket was replaced,

and that the 3rd Respondent intended to use it thereafter.

This Court is of the view that the nature of the defect itself needs to be given

due consideration in determining what remedy the complainant is entitled to.

In the present instance, although the 3rd Respondent has made three visits to

the Petitioner, the fact remained that the issue originated from one source.

Once that core issue was identified and repaired, the vehicle was reasonably fit

for the purpose for which it was intended, a factor that has been ignored by

the Inquiry Panel.

This Court must state that the 3rd Respondent has not provided any material to

the CAA to show that the motor vehicle suffered further defects thereafter. It

could therefore be concluded, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary,

that the vehicle was roadworthy after the replacement of the gasket, a fact

which the inquiry panel not only opted to turn a blind eye to, but went a step

further by claiming that the vehicle had not been repaired.

The Petitioner has drawn the attention of this Court to the judgment of the

Supreme Court in Seylan Bank Ltd vs. Clement Charles Epasinghe and

another.69 In that case, the appellant bank and the respondents entered into a

Lease Agreement by which they agreed that the appellant shall lease to the

respondents, a brand new 40 seater bus sold and supplied by Sathosa Motors.

The respondents had agreed to pay to the appellant as rent for the lease of the

vehicle, an aggregate sum of Rs. 2,865,540/- in 60 monthly rentals of

69 SC (CHC) Appeal No. 39/06; SC Minutes of 1st August 2017 per Prasanna Jayawardena, P.C., J.

67

Rs.47,759/- each. On non-payment of the lease rentals, the appellant bank had

filed action in the Commercial High Court to recover the moneys due under the

lease agreement. The respondents had taken the defence that the vehicle had

developed serious problems and as the vehicle was not in a serviceable

condition, the lease agreement had been frustrated. Having considered

whether the bus had in fact been rendered unserviceable, the Supreme Court

stated as follows:

Next, to consider the defects in the vehicle, the letters written by the

defendants refer to the vehicle breaking down on 11thJanuary 1998 after

which it was repaired and returned to the defendants. The letters also

refer to defects in the lights, the front and rear windscreens not being

properly fixed, repairs to the front hub, oil leaks, and defects in the front

shock absorbers. These are all defects which can be repaired.

As mentioned earlier, the evidence is that, these defects were repaired

and the vehicle was handed back to the defendants on 27thJuly 1998. The

evidence indicates that the defendants continued to use the vehicle after

that. In these circumstances, it is not possible to reasonably conclude that,

the defects in the vehicle rendered the vehicle unusable.

This Court therefore takes view that the failure on the part of the Inquiry Panel

to take into account the aforementioned two most relevant facts i.e. that the

vehicle was roadworthy after the repairs were effected successfully by the

Petitioner has robbed the decision of all logic, and has rendered the said

decision unreasonable and irrational.

68

The conclusions of the Inquiry Panel are not supported by the evidence

The fact that the 3rd Respondent purchased a KIA Sorento motor vehicle from

the Petitioner and that the said motor vehicle had an issue on the date of

purchase is not in dispute. The fact that the Petitioner carried out repairs on

several occasions but all arising from the loose radiator hose, is also

undisputed.

The Petitioner states that the Inquiry Panel however had no evidence to

support its finding that the replacement of the gasket reduced the value of the

vehicle, and that for such a conclusion to be valid, it must be supported by

expert evidence or testimony of a person knowledgeable in the field of motor

vehicles. This Court is in agreement with this submission, especially since no

material has been placed before this Court that the members of the Inquiry

Panel had expertise in motor mechanism. The 3rd Respondent did not place the

evidence of an expert to support the position that the replacement of the

gasket reduced the value of the vehicle. Neither has the inquiry panel

explained the basis for such conclusion. The Inquiry Panel has therefore arrived

at a conclusion, which ultimately weighed heavily in their ultimate decision

that the vehicle be replaced, without having any factual or legal basis for such

conclusion.

The Inquiry Panel has also been influenced by the fact that the 3rd

Respondents ability to pursue his career as a dental surgeon was affected by

having to take the motor vehicle for repairs on three occasions. It is the

position of the Petitioner that this finding of the Inquiry Panel too is devoid of

evidence. The 3rd Respondent was employed by the Government, and no

69

evidence has been placed that his career as a Government Medical Officer was

affected by the issue relating to the vehicle, or that he suffered a loss

professionally. This Court therefore observes again that such a conclusion,

quite apart from being irrelevant to the core issue, has been reached in the

absence of any evidentiary support.

The conclusion that the 3rd Respondent was denied the use of a defect free

vehicle from the date of purchase is contrary to the facts of this application.

This Court has already noted that after the Petitioner replaced the coolant on

day one, it took three months for the 3rd Respondent to make the next

complaint. The repair on the second occasion took four days while the final

repair took twelve days.

It appears to this Court from the above reasoning of the Inquiry Panel that it

was swayed by emotional considerations as opposed to acting in a professional

manner with the result that it failed to arrive at a just decision based on the

facts placed before them and the applicable law.

It also appears to this Court that the members of the Inquiry Panel had already

made up their mind to replace the vehicle and that the reasons provided were

merely an unsuccessful attempt to justify the decision, without there being a

proper consideration of the evidence placed before them. The fact that the

Inquiry Panel was determined to replace the vehicle of the 3rd Respondent

with a new vehicle is clear when one considers the fact that the inquiry panel

completely lost sight of the fact that the vehicle was in fact repaired. This is

borne out by the fact that the reasons provided by the inquiry panel are based

on the assumption that the issue has still not been remedied, when the

70

material placed before them was to the contrary. Such was their resolve to

replace the vehicle that the Inquiry Panel did not for a moment consider the

appropriateness of granting compensation, instead of replacement.

Conclusion

If the facts in the cases that this Court have referred to in considering what is

meant by reasonably fit, as well as the decision of the Supreme Court in Seylan

Bank vs. Clement Charles Epasinghe and another70 are compared with the

facts of the present case, one would observe that:

(a) The vehicle of the 3rd Respondent did not have multiple defects, even

though having multiple defects is not the sole determining factor;

(b) The issue was identified by the Petitioner, although belatedly;

(c) The issue was repaired;

(d) The vehicle did not have any issue thereafter;

(e) The vehicle was roadworthy, after the last repair.

This Court is therefore of the view that neither on the facts nor on the law

could the Inquiry Panel have arrived at the conclusion that the vehicle should

be replaced. In the above circumstances, this Court is of the view that the

decision in P18, as conveyed by P17 to replace the vehicle with a brand new

vehicle is unreasonable and irrational. Not only would the said decision pass

the lower threshold for unreasonableness laid down in Tameside, it would

70 Supra.

71

even pass the high threshold for unreasonableness laid down in Wednesbury,

and the GCHQ case, namely that its a decision which is so outrageous in its

defiance of logic or of accepted moral standards that no sensible person who

had applied his mind to the question to be decided could have arrived at it.

Is the decision of the Inquiry Panel contrary to the principles of

proportionality?

This Court shall now consider the second aspect of the final argument of the

learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioner that the decision of the Inquiry

Panel to replace the vehicle is contrary to the principles of proportionality.

Apart from determining whether the decision of the inquiry panel P18 is

irrational or unreasonable, it is the view of this Court that it can also view the

said decision in the light of the developing principle of proportionality, which is

considered as an additional safeguard to the existing grounds of judicial review

whereby Courts can effectively exercise their role in ensuring a superior quality

of decisions by Public authorities.

Do not use a sledgehammer to crack a nut is a common phrase which can be

used to summarise the basic concept of proportionality. Lord Steyn in R v

Secretary of State for the Home Department (Ex parte Daly)71 cited with

approval the three stage test for proportionality adopted by the Privy Council

in the case of de Freitas v Permanent Secretary of Ministry of Agriculture,

Fisheries, Lands and Housing72. A fourth ground, namely that the decision

must always involve the striking of a fair balance between the rights of the

71 Supra. 72[1999] 1 AC 69.

72

individual and the interests of the community was endorsed in Huang v.

Secretary of State for the Home Department73

There is much discussion on the overlap between the principles of

proportionality and unreasonableness. As stated in Administrative Law by

Wade and Forsyth:74

It is clear that the principles of reasonableness and proportionality cover

a great deal of common ground. In the case, for example, where the

revocation of a market trader's license was quashed as being an

unreasonably severe penalty for a small offence, the decision could have

been based on disproportionality as easily as on unreasonableness.75 As

Lord Hoffmann has said, it is not possible to see daylight between

them.76 They will often be assimilated by the 'margin of appreciation'

allowed by European law, which gives latitude for administrative decisions

by national authorities in a manner similar to the British doctrine.

The primary distinction between unreasonableness or irrationality and

proportionality has been described in De Smiths Judicial Review, in the

following manner77:

The focus of attention in these cases will be principally the impact of the

decision upon the affected person. The outcome or end-product of the

decision making process will thus be assessed, rather than the way the

73[2007] 2 AC 167. 74 Supra. page 315. 75 R v Barnsley, ex p Hook [1976] 1 WLR 1052. 76 In A sense of proportion (John Morris Kelly Memorial Lecture, 1996) quoted in R v. Chief Constable of Sussex ex p International Traders Ferry Limited; supra. 77 Supra. at page 628.

73

decision was reached (although the factors taken into account in reaching

the decision may also be or may be assumed to be incorrectly

weighed.)

The ground of proportionality as a separate ground of judicial review was

predicted by Lord Diplock in the GCHQ case.78 In R v Secretary of State for the

Home Department, ex parte Brind79 the House of Lords, while refusing to

accept that proportionality was a separate ground of review in English

domestic law, still acknowledged that it might be incorporated into English law

at some point.80 In Pham v Secretary of State for the Home Department

(Open Society Justice Initiative intervening),81 the principle of proportionality

received the endorsement of seven justices of the Supreme Court as a flexible

approach to principles of judicial review, although this case was not decided on

proportionality.82

Although the ground of proportionality is gaining increasing acceptance in

English Courts in matters involving Convention rights83 and EU Law, there is still

some concern about the degree of interference with the merits of a decision of

a public authority and therefore there is still some resistance to adopting the

doctrine as a separate ground of judicial review in English domestic law or in

general as a replacement of the test of Wednesbury unreasonableness and

irrationality.

78 Supra. Lord Diplock, having set out Illegality, Irrationality and Procedural Impropriety as being the grounds under which judicial review was available, went onto state as follows: I have in mind particularly the possible adoption in the future of the principle of proportionality which is recognised in the Administrative Law of several of our fellow members of the European Economic Community. 79 [1991] 1 AC 696. 80This case is still the leading case on the status of proportionality in common law- Administrative Law by Wade and Forsyth (Supra) at page 315. 81 [2015] UKSC 19. 82 Lord Carnwath at page 60- as cited in De Smiths Judicial Review (Supra); page 640. 83 European Convention on Human Rights.

74

The principle of proportionality is by no means a new concept to judicial

review in Sri Lanka. In the case of Premaratne vs. University Grants

Commission and Others84, this Court concurred with the view of Lord Denning

M.R. in R v Brantley Metropolitan Borough Council, Ex parte Hook85, which

illustrates that if any action or measure is considered to do more harm than

good in reaching a given objective it is liable to be set aside for the court has to

consider whether the ends justify the means. This Court went onto hold that,

to punish a student as severely as has been done in this case entails a breach

of the principle of proportionality.86

In the subsequent case of Neidra Fernando vs. Ceylon Tourist Board and

Others87 this Court, while holding that the allegation of bias regarding the

recommendation to dismiss the petitioner from service was well founded,

went on to state that the recommended punishment was disproportionate,

although this Court noted that there has been and remains some uncertainty

as to the extent to which the notion of proportionality may or should be

considered to be a ground of review.

In the case of Wickremasinghe vs. Chandrananda De Silva, Secretary, Ministry

of Defence and Others,88 this Court was hesitant to accept the doctrine of

proportionality as a separate ground for judicial review in Sri Lanka,

particularly in light of the facts and circumstances of that case.

84 [1998] 3 Sri LR 395 at 417. 85 [1976] 1 WLR 1052. 86 Supra. at page 418. 87 [2002] 2 Sri LR 169. 88 [2001] 2 Sri LR 333.

75

Gooneratne, J recently held that the case of N.V. Gooneratne v. Sri Lanka Land

Reclamation and Development Corporation and Others89 was a fit and proper

case to apply the doctrine of proportionality.

In that case, it was held that the decision of the 3rd respondent to send the

petitioner on compulsory leave was highly unwarranted and unreasonable and

contrary to the doctrine of proportionality:

The Petitioners submission on proportionality is a recongised Principle in

Administrative Law. I have no hesitation with the development of law in

this direction, to apply the doctrine of proportionality to the facts of this

case. I am in full agreement with the submission of learned Presidents

Counsel for the Petitioner regarding applicability of the above principle.

This Court is of the view that the doctrine of proportionality has still not

developed to a stage where it can stand alone as a separate ground for judicial

review in the realm of Administrative Law in Sri Lanka. However, where the

appropriate facts and circumstances warrant it, this Court does not see any

reason why the doctrine of proportionality may not be developed further,

particularly in light of the considerations that have motivated this Court to

loosen the rigours of Wednesbury unreasonableness and review decisions with

varying degrees of intensity, depending on the facts and circumstances of each

case.

89 CA (Writ) Application No. 412/07; CA Minutes of 24th February 2011.

76

As observed by Professor Craig, proportionality should neither be regarded as

a panacea that will cure all ills, real and imaginary within our existing regime of

review, nor should it be perceived as something dangerous or alien.90

This Court wishes to reiterate the fact that the CAA must strike a fair balance

between the interests of the consumer and that of the trader. Being vested

with discretion with regard to the relief that can be given, the CAA must

exercise great caution in exercising that discretion, and provide the relief that

would address the grievance of the consumer which is commensurate with the

grievance of the consumer. It is certainly a matter of regret that the Inquiry

Panel has not considered at all, whether compensation was an adequate

remedy. As held by this Court in Benedict vs. The Monetary Board of the

Central Bank of Sri Lanka and another,91 when a statute confers a public

authority with several options, it is the duty of such public authority to

consider all such options and arrive at a decision which is commensurate with

the complaint.

The fact remains that even though the vehicle had an issue, and the 3rd

Respondent may have been inconvenienced by it, the Petitioner effected the

necessary repairs and the vehicle was thereafter roadworthy. The condition of

the vehicle was not the same as the vehicles in the cases that this Court has

already referred to. In these circumstances, it is the view of this Court that

replacement of the vehicle was certainly not warranted, and therefore, the

relief provided is entirely disproportionate to the issue that had arisen. On this

basis, too, the decision of the Inquiry Panel is liable to be quashed by a Writ of

Certiorari. 90 P.P. Craig, Administrative Law, (5th Edition, Sweet & Maxwell, 2007) at page 630. 91 Supra.

77

Is the 3rd Respondent entitled to compensation?

There is one final matter that this Court wishes to consider. That is whether

this Court, in the exercise of the discretionary powers vested in it, should

direct the CAA to consider whether the 3rd Respondent is entitled to

compensation under and in terms of Section 13(4) of the CAA Act. Such a

course of action would enable the CAA to duly assess the evidence placed

before the Inquiry Panel and determine the nature of such compensation and

the quantum thereof, upon due consideration of the material placed before it

by the 3rd Respondent.

In Coca-Cola Beverages Sri Lanka Ltd vs. Consumer Affairs Authority,92 this

Court has held that compensation in terms of Section 13(4) is not punitive in

nature, and that compensation can be awarded to meet the actual loss or to

compensate for a proven injury or loss.

The burden of establishing loss is therefore with the consumer. Consumers

who make applications to the CAA must bear in mind that they are not entitled

to relief as of right and that they must play an active role by presenting before

the CAA, the necessary material to prove the loss suffered, thereby enabling

the CAA to arrive at a decision in terms of the law.

This Court, having considered whether it should adopt the said course of

action, is of the view that such an exercise would be futile, for the reason that

no material has been placed by the 3rd Respondent before the Inquiry Panel to

92 CA (Writ) Application No. 326/2006; CA Minutes of 18th February 2011.

78

substantiate the loss that he suffered, if any, and in such a situation, the CAA

will not be in a position to quantify the loss.

Conclusion

In the above circumstances, this Court issues a Writ of Certiorari quashing

P17, and a Writ of Certiorari quashing the findings in P18 that the Petitioner

should replace the vehicle sold to the 3rd Respondent.

This Court makes no order with regard to costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal