Page 1 of 5

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA.

In the matter of an Application for

Revision under and in terms of the

Article 138 of the Constitution read

together with the Section 404 of the

Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15

of 1979 against the order dated

19.08.2020 of refusing to grant bail by

the Hon. High Court of Colombo.

Case No. of the Court of Appeal:

CPA 132/2020

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka

Case No. of the High Court of Colombo:

HC 613/19

Complainant

Vs.

Madapathage Dona Thilaka Alias Shyamali

(Currently Incarcerated in the Remand

custody)

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Madapathage Dona Thilaka Alias Shyamali.

(Currently incarcerated in the Remand

Custody)

Page 2 of 5

Before Menaka Wijesundera J.

Neil Iddawala J.

Counsel Tenny Fernando for the

Petitioner.

Maheshika Silva, SSC for

the respondent.

Argued On 04.05.2021

Decided On 19.05.2021

Accused Petitioner

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant Respondent

Page 3 of 5

MENAKA WIJESUNDERA J.

The instant application for revision has been filed to set aside the order

dated 19 .8.2020 of the learned High Court Judge of Colombo.

In the instant application the suspect has been taken in to custody for

120 grams of gross quantity of heroin on 2.2.2018, later the

Government Analyst revealed it to be 43 grams of heroin. However the

Attorney General has indicted the suspect for the same in the High

Court.

The petitioner sates that he made an application for bail and the

learned High Court Judge refused the same on the basis that there were

no exceptional circumstances. The counsel for the petitioner urged

before this court that the learned High Court Judge has failed to

consider that the chief investigative officer and the officers who helped

him to conduct the raid are now in remand for similar offences with

greater quantity of heroin and that the credibility of them as witnesses

for the prosecution case creates a serious doubt in the case for the

prosecution and in such a situation the incineration of the petitioner is

not fair and justifiable.

The contention of the learned sate counsel is that the petitioner was

taken into custody while she was serving a suspended sentence for a

similar offence and such details the petitioner has failed to adduce in

the petition; hence he has not come to court with clean hands.

The petitioner has been taken in to custody under the Poisons Opium

and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance and she has been indicted under the

Page 4 of 5

same ordinance. Hence an accused who is incarcerated under the said

act must furnish exceptional circumstances to obtain bail.

In the instant application the exceptionality the petitioner has urged is

the fact that since the officers who conducted the raid is currently

incarcerated for similar offences committed while on duty as with

regard to the productions pertaining to their investigations, the

truthfulness of the investigation is in serious doubt. But of course the

learned High Court judge has disregarded the same stating that they

were not accused of the instant case.

Upon consideration of the submissions of both counsels it is very clear

that the petitioner has failed to state the previous convictions, which

this court is unable to endorse. This court also observes that the High

Court Judge has stated that the officers who conducted the raid being

accused in other cases of similar nature is not a ground for the

petitioner to be enlarged on bail which this court does not see as being

very correct because it causes a serious doubt in the investigations

conducted by these officers as to the truthfulness of the same,

therefore the question arises whether it is morally correct to keep an

accused in remand until the conclusion of the trial under those

circumstances.

But on the other hand it has been decided by the previous benches of

this court that facts of the case need not be considered for bail. In the

instant case the law pertaining to the instant case calls for exceptional

reasons for a suspect or accused to be enlarged on bail.

Page 5 of 5

Upon consideration of the submissions made this court is of the opinion

that although the trial has commenced the current corona situation in

the country which has affected the smooth running of the judicial

system might delay the conclusion of the trial hence in view of the

exceptional behavior of the investigative officers, this court decides to

enlarge the petitioner on bail.

Hence instant application for revision is allowed and the petitioner is

enlarged on bail on the following conditions,

1) On a cash bail of Rs one million,

2) With surety bail of two million each,

3) The petitioner to surrender her passport to the relevant High Court,

and the Registrar of this court to inform the Director of Immigration and

Emigration not to allow the petitioner to leave the country

4) The petitioner to report to the police Narcotics Bearue on every

Sunday of the month.

The Registrar of this court to convey the instant order to the relevant

High Court.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.

I agree.

Neil Iddawala J.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.