IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Andrabaduge Sudath De Silva,

No.12, Browns Road,

Matara.

Petitioner-Appellant

CA CASE NO: CA/PHC/153/2011

HC MATARA CASE NO: SP/HCCA/MA/WRIT/3/2010

MC MATARA CASE NO: 26330

Vs.

Deputy Commissioner of Provincial

Revenue,

Provincial Revenue Department,

Southern Province,

Matara.

Respondent-Respondent

Before: A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Rohan Sahabandu, P.C., for the Appellant.

Thilanka Peiris, S.S.C., for the Respondent.

Argued on: 28.06.2019

Decided on: 25.07.2019

2

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The Commissioner of Provincial Revenue of the Southern Province

(respondent) filed the Certificate of Tax in Default marked X1 in the

Magistrates Court of Matara to recover Turnover Tax allegedly

defaulted by the appellant for the period stated therein on the sale

of lotteries of the National Lotteries Board. The learned Magistrate

by order dated 26.11.2007 ordered it to be recovered as a fine. The

appellant did not appeal against the said order but on 23.04.2008

filed an application in the High Court of Matara seeking to quash

the said Certificate of Tax in Default by writ of certiorari on the

basis that no Turnover Tax could be levied on the sale of the

lotteries of the National Lotteries Board. The High Court without

going into this important question of law, which goes to the

jurisdiction of the authority to issue such Certificate, summarily

dismissed the application of the appellant on the ground of delay

in filing the application.

Let me pause for a while to emphasize, as I always do, that

disposing of cases on high technical grounds although easy and

speedy does not auger well for the administration of justice system

as the core matter in issue is left untouched and the grievance of

the aggrieved party is not addressed. The litigants want cases to

be disposed of on merits and not on technical grounds. When

cases are disposed of on technical grounds, the system suffers.

Cases shall be decided, not merely concluded.

The learned High Court Judge has calculated the delay from the

date of the Certificate of Tax in Default and not from the date of

the order of the Learned Magistrate.

3

The delay shall not result in automatic dismissal of cases where no

time limit to institute an action has been prescribed. (Rajakaruna

v. R.J. De Mel, Minister of Finance [1985] 1 Sri LR 391)

In the Supreme Court Case of Biso Menika v. Cyril De Alwis [1982]

1 Sri LR 368, Justice Sharvananda (later Chief Justice), at page

379 stated:

An application for a Writ of Certiorari should be filed within a

reasonable time from the date of the Order which the

applicant seeks to have quashed. What is reasonable time

and what will constitute undue delay will depend upon the

facts of each particular case. However the time lag that can be

explained does not spell laches or delay. If the delay can be

reasonably explained, the Court will not decline to interfere.

The delay which a Court can excuse is one which is caused by

the applicant pursuing a legal remedy and not a remedy

which is extra-legal. One satisfactory way to explain the delay

is for the petitioner to show that he has been seeking relief

elsewhere in a manner provided by the Law.

In the instant case, the appellant has taken up the same objection

that the Southern Provincial Council did not have authority to levy

Turnover Tax on National Lotteries in the Magistrates Court. But

the learned Magistrate has rejected it stating that the Magistrates

Court is not the forum to challenge the Certificate on that ground.

It is after this order, the appellant has gone before the High Court

challenging the Certificate of Tax in Default by way of writ of

certiorari. Hence the delay in my view has satisfactorily been

explained.

4

Be that as it may, if a party seeking to quash an administrative or

judicial decision does so on the basis that the tribunal which made

the impugned decision did so without jurisdiction, and the Court is

satisfied that the complaint is well-founded, the Court shall not

dismiss the application on delay.

In that regard Justice Sharvananda in the above-mentioned case

at pages 379-380 stated thus:

When the Court has examined the record and is satisfied the

Order complained of is manifestly erroneous or without

jurisdiction the Court would be loath to allow the mischief of

the Order to continue and reject the application simply on the

ground of delay, unless there are very extraordinary reasons

to justify such rejection. Where the authority concerned has

been acting altogether without basic jurisdiction, the Court

may grant relief in spite of the delay unless the conduct of the

party shows that he has approbated the usurpation of

jurisdiction. In any such event, the explanation of the delay

should be considered sympathetically.

Recent practice clearly indicates that where the proceedings

were a nullity an award of Certiorari will not readily be

deniedde SmithJudicial Review4th Ed. page 426.

In this connection Professor Wade in his Administrative Law

4th Ed. at page 561 states: the discretion to withhold remedy

against unlawful action may make inroads upon the rule of

Law and must therefore be exercised with the greatest care.

In any normal case the remedy accompanies the right, but the

fact that a person aggrieved is entitled to Certiorari ex debito

5

justitiae does not alter the fact that a Court has power to

exercise the discretion against him, as it may in the case of

any discretionary remedy.

Unlike in English Law or in our Law there is no statutory time

limit within which a petition for the issue of a Writ must be

filed. But a rule of practice has grown which insists upon such

petition being made without undue delay. When no time limit

is specified for seeking such remedy, the Court has ample

power to condone delays, where denial of Writ to the

petitioner is likely to cause great injustice. The Court may

therefore in its discretion entertain the application in spite of

the fact that a petitioner comes to Court late, especially where

the Order challenged is a nullity for absolute want of

jurisdiction in the authority making the order.

The appellant has been appointed as the Marketing Agent of the

National Lotteries Board for the Matara Electorate by P1. He was

required to purchase lottery tickets from the District Marketing

Agent of the National Lotteries Board of Matara and sell them to

other sellers on a commission basis on the conditions stated

therein. The Turnover Tax which is the subject matter of this

appeal has been levied on income of selling lotteries1 by the

appellant.

It is the contention of the learned Presidents Counsel for the

appellant that the Provincial Council cannot impose Turnover Tax

on the income of selling lotteries of the National Lotteries Board as

1 Paragraph 4.7 of the written submissions of the respondent dated 13.12.2017 which states that the Appellant was liable to pay the Turnover tax on income of selling lotteries as imposed on him by X1 Certificate.

6

the appellant does so as the agent of the National Lotteries Board

notwithstanding he gets a commission by so selling.

Article 154G(1) of the Constitution introduced by the Thirteenth

Amendment reads as follows:

Every Provincial Council may, subject to the provisions of the

Constitution, make statutes applicable to the Province for

which it is established, with respect to any matter set out in

List I of the Ninth Schedule (hereinafter referred to as the

Provincial Council List).

Item 36.2 of the Provincial Council List reads as follows:

Betting taxes, and taxes on prize competitions and lotteries,

other than National Lotteries and lotteries organized by the

Government of Sri Lanka.

According to item 36.2, Provincial Councils cannot levy taxes on

National Lotteries and Lotteries organized by the Government of Sri

Lanka.

Article 154G(7) of the Constitution introduced by the Thirteenth

Amendment reads as follows:

A Provincial Council shall have no power to make statutes on

any matter set out in List II of the Ninth Schedule (hereinafter

referred to as the Reserved List).

Under Finance in relation to national revenue, monetary policy and

external resources, customs of the Reserved List, following items

are found:

7

(f) Lotteries organized by the Government of Sri Lanka or a

Provincial Council

(l) Taxes on income, capital and wealth of individuals,

companies and corporations

(n) Turnover taxes and stamp duties, except to the extent

specified in List I

According to (f) above, it is seen that Provincial Councils shall have

no power to make statutes on lotteries organized by the

Government of Sri Lanka.

Section 96 of the Fiscal Charter of the Southern Provincial Council,

No.7 of 1990, which deals with the subject of imposing Taxes on

Lotteries states that, taxes can be imposed on Lotteries except

National Lotteries or Lotteries organized by the Government of Sri

Lanka.

This has been enacted in consonance with item 36.2 of the

Provincial Council List quoted above.

According to (l) above, imposing taxes on income of individuals are

ruled out.

But this is exactly what the Provincial Council endeavours to do in

this instance.

According to (n) above, making statutes on Turnover Taxes by

Provincial Councils is not permitted except to the extent specified

in the Provincial Council List.

8

The sole argument of the learned Senior State Counsel for the

respondent is that the Turnover Tax in question on the income of

selling National Lotteries was imposed in terms of section 3 of the

Fiscal Charter of the Southern Provincial Council, which allows the

Provincial Council to levy Turnover Tax on the income of selling

any commodity, which includes a National Lottery.2 Learned

Senior State Counsel says that this is not Lottery Tax but Turnover

Tax imposed on income of selling Lotteries.

A conspicuous feature of the submission of the learned Senior

State Counsel is not to place much emphasis on the Thirteenth

Amendment to the Constitution, in particular, the Provincial

Council List and the Reserved List, but to rely heavily on the Fiscal

Charter of the Southern Provincial Council, in particular, section

3(1) thereof. What the learned Senior State Counsel fails to realize

is that Provincial Statutes are not sui generis. They shall always

be subject to the limitations contained in the Thirteenth

Amendment to the Constitution, which established Provincial

Councils.

As I have already stated, Provincial Councils can make statutes

with respect to any matter set out in the Provincial Council List,

and they have no power to make statutes on any matter set out in

the Reserved List, and if they do the latter, they can be challenged

as being ultra vires.

Section 3(1) of the Fiscal Charter is a general provision to levy

Turnover Taxes on the turnover of businesses.

2 Paragraph 4.1 of the written submissions of the respondent dated 13.12.2017.

9

Section 3(1) of the Fiscal Charter is based on item 36.1 of the

Provincial List which reads as follows:

Turnover taxes on wholesale and retail sales within such

limits and subject to such exemptions as may be prescribed

by law made by Parliament.

Item 36.1 of the Provincial Council List is self-explanatory. It is

subject to exemptions as may be prescribed by law made by

Parliament. The Supreme Law made by Parliament is the

Constitution.

When the Constitution retains the subject of Lotteries organized by

the Government with the Central Government having it included in

the Reserved List; and also item 36.2 of the Provincial Council List

enacts that Provincial Council can impose taxes on Lotteries other

than National Lotteries and Lotteries organized by the Government;

and also in terms of item (l) under Finance in the Reserved List,

taxes on income of individuals cannot be levied by a Provincial

Council, I do not think that the Southern Provincial Council is

empowered to levy Turnover Tax on the income of selling National

Lotteries solely depending on the general section 3(1) of the Fiscal

Charter of the Provincial Council which allows to levy Turnover Tax

on business.

On parity of reasoning, according to sections 8 and 9 of the Fiscal

Charter of the Southern Provincial Council, once the Provincial

Minister exempts any commodity for the purpose of the Fiscal

Charter, Turnover Tax on the income of selling such commodity

cannot be charged.

10

For the aforesaid reasons, I hold that the respondent

Commissioner of Provincial Revenue, being an officer of the

Southern Provincial Council, has acted ultra vires by issuing the

Certificate of Tax in Default to recover Turnover Tax on the income

of selling National Lotteries, which the appellant did as an Agent of

the National Lotteries Board. The Provincial Councils have no

authority to levy whatever the taxes on National Lotteries and

Lotteries organized by the Government of Sri Lanka.

I leave the question whether Provincial Councils can levy taxes on

Lotteries organized by the Provincial Council to be decided in a

future case as it did not come up for decision in the instant case.3

Hence I quash the Certificate of Tax in Default marked X1 by way

of writ of certiorari.

Judgment of the High Court is set aside and the appeal is allowed.

The appellant is entitled to costs of both here and the Court below.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

3 From the document marked X filed with the written submissions of the respondent it is seen that levying Turnover Tax by the Provincial Councils has been suspended with effect from 01.01.2011 but that has no impediment to recover the tax in default relevant to the period before the said date.