J I i I 1 !

1 1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

(.A. L.A 394/2006

D.C. Attanagalla 421/M

In the matter of an application for Leave to

Appeal in terms of Section 757 of the Civil

Procedure Code.

*******

1

K.M. Prabath

"Mangala",Indiparape

Mirigama.

Plaintiff

Vs

Ceylinco Insurance Company Ltd.

"Ceylinco House"

No. 69, Janadhipathi Mawatha

Colombo 01.

Defendant

And now between

Vs

Ceylinco Insurance Company Ltd.

"Ceylinco House"

No. 69, Janadhipathi Mawatha

Colombo Ol.

Defendant-Petitioner

ft

f

It

, i

I ! I I j

j i I !

J l I I

J I ! I I I I

~

1

. ,

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

Deepali Wijesundera J.

Vs

K.M. Prabath

"Mangala"

Idiparape, Mirigama.

Plaintiff-Respondent

: Deepali Wijesundera J.

M.M.A. Gaffoor J.

: I.S.De Silva with Oeeptha Perera

For the Defendant-Petitioner

Seevali Delgoda for the

Plaintiff-Respondent

: 01 st September, 2015

: 22nd January, 2016

The plaintiff respondent filed action against the defendant

petitioner seeking to enforce the insurance policy no. WP02DV000012

marked P1 (A) entered into with the defendant petitioner company. The

plaintiff respondent in his plaint had stated that his business premises

2

fli

f

~

fI

I

i

Ij ! !

I I I I

j i i I t I 1 i

~ I l I

~ 1 1 \ 1

which was insured in the petitioner company was burgled on 31/07/2013

and after he made a claim on the said insurance policy it was rejected

by the defendant petitioner company and alleged that the defendant

petitioner company failed to honour the obligations under the said

insurance policy and claimed damages. The defendant petitioner

answering the plaintiff respondent had stated that the action was time

barred since the claim was rejected in terms of clause 18 of the policy

where the liability of the company ceased at the expiry of three months

from the date of the rejection. The case was fixed for trial and parties

have framed issued and the defendant petitioner has moved court to try

the legal issue 14 (a) 14 (b) and 15 as preliminary issues. Parties have

filed their written submissions and court has delivered the findings on

09/09/2006 rejecting the defendant petitioner's application and fixed the

case for trial. The defendant petitioner being aggrieved by the said order

has filed the instant application.

The petitioner in his submission stated that the learned District

Judge has erroneously come to the conclusion that evidence should be

led before answering the said issues based on the premise that clause

18 of the policy applies only if the claim is based on fraudulent

documents. The petitioner stated that clause 18 is very clear and that

when a claim is made and is rejected the action has to be filed within

3

i!

1

three months. The petitioner argued that the present claim was made

and rejected and such a situation is governed by clause 18 and not 20.

The defendant petitioner submitted that the claim was rejected by

letter dated 18/11/2003 and the plaintiff respondent filed the case on

29/07/2004 which is not within three months of the date of rejection.

It was submitted on behalf of the plaintiff respondent that under

clause 20 the respondent came to court within a period of one year and

in such a situation it is clause 20 and not 18 that would be applicable.

The respondent stated that clause 18 is clearly intended to cover

situations where there is fraud on the part of the insured and can not be

construed as a catchall provision and that it could only been intended to

inflict severe consequences on an insured who commits a fraud.

The respondent stated that clause 20 is the general provision

governing the time limit for liability under the policy which the

respondent is entitled to rely upon unless and until it is proven and

established that he has committed a fraud in making his claim.

4

f ! i

r. I II

f l I

\ ,IIl

JlI

IIt

The respondent citing the judgment in Jagath Sooriyarachchi vs

Laksiri Peiris CALA 170/2003 DC Moratuwa 958/M said that it was

held in this case that if an issue of law arises upon facts those facts

must be ascertained either by way of admission or by proving them at

the trial.

Clause 18 of the said policy states thus;

FRAUD

If the claim be in respect fraudulent, or if any false

declaration be made, or used in support thereof or if any

fraudulent means or devices are used by the insured, or one

acting on his behalf to obtain any benefits under this policy

or if the loss or damage be occasioned by the willful act, or

with the connivance of the insured or if the claim be made

and rejected and an action or suit be not commenced within

three months after such rejection or in case of arbitration

taking place in pursuance of the 19th condition of this policy

within three months after the arbitrator, arbitrators or

umpire shall have made their award all benefit under this

policy shall be forfeited.

5

It f ! I II t I

I i i I

t

III II

i fIIt l

tii IfI[ r1[

,

Clause 20 of the said policy states thus;

TIME LIMIT FOR COMPANY'S LIABILITY

In no case whatever shall the Company be liable to any loss

or damage after the expiration of twelve months from the

happening of the loss or damage unless the claim is the subject of

pending action or arbitration.

Clause 18 of the policy speaks of situations where the claim is

fraudulent where a false declaration is made to support the claim or

where the loss is caused willfully.

Clause 20 is the general provision governing the time limit for

liability under the policy under which the plaintiff respondent has filed his

case.

The applicability of clause 18 of the policy of insurance can only

be determined after ascertaining whether or not the claim is tainted by

fraud which entails considering the facts of the case regarding which the I

1

parties are clearly at variance. In such a situation the trial judge should

exercise the discretionary powers conferred by Sec. 147 of the Civil

6

IIt

~ , ), IIi

Ii I

l I(iII

. ,

Procedure Code and go into merits of the case as rightfully held by the

learned District Judge in her order delivered on 19/09/2006.

For the afore stated reasons I see no legal basis or logical reason

to allow the petitioner's application. Application of the defendant

petitioner is refused with costs fixed at Rs. 100,000/=.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

M.M.A. Gaffoor J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

7

I,. j It

f I

f t I If {

i