IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Court of Appeal (PHC) APN Application No: 9412011 PHC Kalutara Case No: Revision 10/2007 MC Matugama Case No: 90999

In the matter of an Application for Revision of

Judgment dated 8th December 2009 by the

Provincial High Court of the Western province

holden in Kalutara

I. N.A.K.L. Wijenayake,

Asst. Commissioner of Agrarian

Development,

Agrarian Development Department,

4 th Floor, District Secretariat,

Kalutara.

Applicant-Respondent-Petitioner

2. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

2nd Respondents-Petitioner

-Vs-

Gamini Liyanage,

"Kanchana",

Alubogahalanda, Wattala,

Matugama.

Respondent-Petitioner-Respondent

Page 1 of 7

Before

Counsel

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

&

Mahinda Samayawardhena J.

Suranga Wimalasena, SSC for the Applicant-

Respondent-Petitioner.

Leslie J. Siriweera with A.H. Seneviratne for the

Respondent-Petitioner-Respondent.

Written Submissions: By the Applicant-Respondent-Petitioner and 2nd

Respondent-Petitioner on 1010912019

Argued on :

Judgment on :

By the Respondent-Petitioner-Respondent on

29/08/2018

27/08/2019

11110/2019

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

The Applicant-Respondent-Petitioner (Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian

Development, hereinafter referred to as the Petitioner) instituted proceedings

against the Respondent-Petitioner-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the

Respondent) in terms of Section 33(3) of the Agrarian Development Act No. 46 of

2000, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the Act) in the Magistrates Court of

Kalutara from filling a paddy land called Koskatimulla (Panwila) alias

Koskatimulla landa, in extent of 15.5 perches, out ofa larger land of2 roods, more

Page 2of7

fully described in the schedule to the application. The learned Magistrate has made

order dated 02/03/2007, against the Respondent, in terms of Section 33(8) of the

Act. Aggrieved by the said order the Respondent preferred a Revision Application .

to the High Court of the Western Province holden in Kalutara. The learned High

Court Judge, by order dated 31110/2013, set aside the order of the learned

Magistrate. The Appellant is before this Court to canvas the said order dated

31110/2013.

At the commencement of the argument the counsel for the Respondent

raised the following preliminary issues for consideration.

1. The affidavit filed along with the Petition is not the affidavit of the

Applicant-Respondent-Petitioner.

2. Undue delay in filling the revision application.

The affidavit filed along with the Petition of Appeal is supported by an

affidavit by Azeez Mohamed Arif, Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian

Development. According to paragraph I of the said affidavit, the person affirming

the affidavit is the Applicant-Respondent-Petitioner. In paragraph 5, the affirmant

states that;

"1 being the authorized person recognized by law filed an application in the

Magistrate Court of Matugama bearing No. 90999 dated on or about Jdh

November 2005, against the Respondent-Petitioner-Respondent (hereinafter

referred to as the Respondent) by virtue of the provisions of the Agrarian

Development Act No. 460f2000, (hereinafter referred to as the Act) praying inter

Page 3 of 7

aliafor an Order restraining the Respondent and his agentsfrom,contravening the

provisions of Section 33(1) of the said Act."

However, according to the caption of the Petition of Appeal, the Applicant-

Respondent-Petitioner is N.A.K.L. Wijenayake, Assistant Commissioner of

Agrarian Development, who also filed a supporting affidavit with the application

in the Magistrates Court of Matugama. Therefore, no such affidavit is filed of

record, as per paragraph 5, as contended by the affirmant.

In Kumarasinghe Vs. Ratnakumara and others (1983 2 SLR 393 at page

397 Sharvananda, A.C.J. (as he then was), held that;

"While a stranger cannot make an affidavit it need not be made by the party

individually, but may be made by any person who is personally aware of the facts.

The Court is entitled to have the best evidence before it; where there exists

evidence which is first-hand it will be most unsatisfactory to place before court

evidence of any other description. Ordinarily a Petitioner is the best person who

can speak to the facts and verifY the facts averred in the Petition; then, it is he who

shouldfile the affidavit in support of the saidfacts; but if there are other witnesses

too who can, to their personal knowledge, depose to those facts there is no bar to

their filing affidavits in support of the Petition, in addition to or in substitution for

the Petitioner 's affidaVit. But if the Petitioner does not file his own affidavit

verifYing the facts, which he is personally conversant with, then the court would be

extremely reluctant to grant relief But the Petitioner may be excused from filing

an affidavit, iffor some good reason or ground, he is unable to do so. "

Page 4 of 7

In the said case His Lordship cited with approval, Raymond Evershed M.R.

in Re. Cohen (1950) 2 AER 36,37,

"Affidavit evidence can only be entitled to the same weight as oral evidence, when

those who swear the affidavit realize that the obligation of the oath is as serious

when making as affidavit as to when making statements in the witness box . ..

In the impugned affidavit before Court, the Assistant Commissioner of

Agrarian Development affirms that he is the Applicant-Respondent-Petitioner and

that he has filed an affidavit of the Commissioner of Agrarian Development in the

Magistrate's Court ofMatugama. They are factually incorrect statements.

In terms of Section 33(4) of the Act, every application filed against any

person who contravenes the provisions of Section 33(1) of the Act, "shall be

supported by an affidavit verifying to the matters set forth in the application". In

terms of Section 33(7) of the Act, the "court shall not be competent to callfor any

evidence from the Commissioner General or Additional Commissioner General ---

--- in support of the application. ..

In the action filed in the Magistrates Court, the Respondent has taken up the

position that the land has not been properly identified and denied that the applicant

ever conducted a site inspection or identified the disputed land as a paddy land.

The Respondent in his testimony to the Magistrates Court has also stated that the

action against him was filed by the applicant due to personnel animosity.

The affirmant in the present case does not disclose in the affidavit the

reasons as to why the applicant in the Magistrates Court was unable to file an

Page 5 of 7

affidavit, however, the affirmant has filed an affidavit purporting to be the

Applicant and placed before this Court evidence which the affirmant was not privy

to.

The preliminary objection raised by the Respondent does not contemplate a

noncompliance with the rules or an infirmity of an affidavit. Such infirmities

and/or irregularities in an affidavit or with a rule have been observed as technical

in nature that can be cured. (Senok Trade Combine v. Pushpadeva (2015) BLR 40)

In Senanayake vs. Commissioner of Nataional Houseing and Others

(2005) 1 SLR 182, where the validity of an affidavit affirmed outside jurisdiction

was in issue, the Court was inclined to grant the Petitioner permission to file a

fresh affidavit. The significance of the said decision to the instant case is that the

Court while permitting the Petitioner to file a fresh affidavit also stated that the

entitlement to depose to a fresh affidavit was "in identical terms". However, it is to

be noted that no such application to file a fresh affidavit was made in this case.

In Fernando and 18 Others v. Commissioner General of Labour (2009)

BLR 74, the Court held that;

"it is trite law that any person or persons seeking to invoke the discretionary

powers of a court whether by way of an application in revision must come to the

court with clean hands. Among other things this would mean that such person or

persons must not suppress or misrepresent material facts and thereby violate the

duty of utmost goodfaith or uberimaefides owed to court"

Page 6 of 7

As discussed above, material facts contained in the affidavit filed by the

Applicant are disputed on identification of the land and the applicant acting in bad

faith. In such circumstances, the affirrnant has purported to be the applicant to file

the instant revision application, wherein the Petitioner has broken the trust of

acting in utmost good faith. Therefore, the affidavit tendered in support of this

application cannot be admitted as a valid affidavit and should be rejected.

The Petitioner filed this revision application one year and nine months after

the date of the impugned judgment. The delay in filling the revision application is

admitted by the Petitioner and it is attributed to the delay in obtaining the

impugned order from the High Court Registry. However, I find no grounds to

substantiate the said allegation in the pleadings filed of record. Therefore, I uphold

the preliminary objections and dismiss this application.

Application dismissed without costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Page 7 of 7