==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal by way of

Stated Case on a question of law for

the opinion of the Court of Appeal

under and in terms of Section 11A of

the Tax Appeals Commission Act No.

23 of 2011 (as amended).

CA Case No. CA/TAX/17/2021 Tax Appeals Commission No. TAC/IT/086/2016

South Asian Investment (Private)

Limited,

No. 752/1, Baseline Road,

Colombo 09.

APPELLANT

Vs.

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue, Department of Inland Revenue, Sir Chittampalam A. Gardiner Mawatha, Colombo 02.

RESPONDENT

Before: M.C.B.S. Morais, J

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

2

Counsel:

Dr. Shivaji Felix, P.C. with Nivantha Satharasinghe, Sajith Nawaratne, and Asoka

Obeysekara instructed by Abdeen Associates for the Appellant.

Manohara Jayasinghe, D.S.G., with S. Gunaratne, S.C., for the Respondent.

Argued on: 11.06.2026

Delivered on: 15.09.2026

3

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Judgement

Introduction

The Assessee-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the “Appellant”) is a body corporate

incorporated under the laws of Sri Lanka and is capable of suing and being sued in its corporate

name; it is treated as a juristic person in the eyes of the law. The Respondent is the

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue (CGIR), having necessary powers to take decisions

under the Inland Revenue Act, No. 10 of 2006 (as amended) (hereinafter referred to as the “IR

Act”).

The Appellant has submitted its Income Tax return for the year 2011/2012 to the Department

of Inland Revenue, and an Assistant Commissioner has assessed the same since he has not

accepted the submitted Return.

Being aggrieved by the said assessment, the Appellant has appealed to the Respondent. The

Respondent, by his determination made on 14.12.2016, confirmed the assessment.

Thereafter, the Appellant, being dissatisfied with the determination of the Respondent,

appealed to the Tax Appeal Commission (TAC), who also affirmed the determination of the

Respondent.

Being aggrieved by the said determination of the TAC, the Appellant has requested from the

TAC to have a Case Stated. Accordingly, the TAC has caused a Case Stated, and this Appeal

is from the said Case Stated.

Basically, four questions of law have been framed by the TAC for the determination of this

Court, which are subsequently considered in the course of this judgement.

4

The following arguments were advanced before this Court on 11.06.2026; hence, this

judgement.

Arguments

The thrust of the main argument advanced by Dr. Felix is that since it is dividends received

from another company, on which already there is a tax levied under the Inland Revenue Act

No. 10 of 2006, what is received as dividends by the Appellant is exempted from further income

tax chargeable as shown as part of the income in the returns as dividends.

On the other hand, Mr. Jayasinghe argues that if any income derived from anything invested in

shares of another company as part of the primary source of income, it should fall within Section

3(a). Therefore, it cannot be classified as dividends in terms of Section 63; thus, it is not

exempted from the income tax.

Answering a question posed by the Court, he argued that there may be companies whose main

business is to invest in other companies by buying shares and various other source, which

makes it their main source of income. Though it appears in their books as dividends, it is not

really dividends as far as such company that invests or is concerned, that may be their main

source of income which falls within Section 3(a) of the Inland Revenue Act. As such, it cannot

be exempted under Section 63.

Factual matrix

The Appellant is a limited liability company incorporated under the laws of Sri Lanka, and

carrying on the main business of investing in shares of different companies and investing in

treasury bonds.

The Appellant has submitted its income tax return for the year 2011/2012 to the Inland Revenue

Department, which is at page 60 of the TAC Brief and dated 27.09.2012. However, the

5

Assistant Commissioner who assessed the Appellant’s submitted return, refused to accept the

same by his letter of intimation dated 24.11.2014, and Notice of Assessment has been given

dated 28.11.2014, which are respectively available at pages 63 and 65 of the TAC Brief.

Thereafter, the Appellant has appealed to the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue (the

Respondent) by his appeal dated 24.12.2014, who, by his determination dated 14.12.2016,

affirmed the Assessment made by the Assistant Commissioner.

Thereafter, the Appellant appealed to the TAC dated 23.01.2017, and the TAC has considered

the same after three days of arguments commencing from 03.10.2019, and thereafter by its

determination dated 05.04.2021 affirmed the determination of the Respondent who affirmed

the Assessment.

As such, the Appellant has requested for a Case Stated, and accordingly, the TAC has caused

a Case Stated as I referred to above.

Now I will consider each and every question that is relevant to the issue before us.

(i) Is the determination of the TAC time-barred?

(ii) Did the TAC err in law when it regarded the dividend income received by the Appellant

as constituting part of statutory income?

(iii) Has the TAC erred in law when it regarded the project equity granted to subsidiary

companies as loans a part of statutory income?

(iv) Did the TAC err in law when it came to the conclusion that Appellant had profits and

income arising or derived or accrued from the said project equity advancements that

can be treated as under Section 104 of the IR Act?

Further, Dr. Felix has contended and indicated, both at the stage of his oral submissions as well

as in his written submissions, that he is not proceeding with Question (i). Therefore, I will not

6

consider Question (i). In those circumstances, I will straightaway proceed to consider Question

(ii) in order to decide this case.

Question (ii)

It is the contention of the Appellant that the dividend income that the Appellant has derived

from its investment in other company shares had already been subject to tax in terms of Section

65; therefore, it should be exempted from the statutory income and does not form part of the

statutory income and thus, should not be treated as falling withing Section 3(a) as the statutory

income of the Appellant.

On the other hand, it is argued by Mr. Jayasinghe that the Appellant being a company

incorporated as a management company, its main business is to invest money in shares and

securities and sovereign bonds, and therefore, it derives its main income from the investment

of those securities and shares as dividends. Therefore, the Appellant’s income derived from

dividends cannot be treated under Section 63 as according to its own return, 58% of its income

is derived from dividends. Thus, the Appellant’s dividend income should fall within Section

3(a) of the IR Act.

Now I will consider that.

It is true that the Appellant is an investment company, who has invested in shares of different

companies. In addition to that, it is also an undisputed fact that it has invested in sovereign

bonds and government securities, and thus, its main source of business is in investments.

Now I will consider whether such income that the Appellant derives as dividend income has

already been subject to income tax.

Income generated by the other company in whose shares the Appellant has invested in, who

has already deducted tax payable on the dividends earned; thus, if the resident company (the

7

Appellant) is expected to pay the tax on the dividends received from such a company, then the

dividends is subject to double taxation.

Now I will consider what amounts to statutory income.

The statutory income that can be computed is stipulated in Section 28 of the IR Act, which

reads thus;

28. (1) The statutory income of every person for each year of assessment from every

source of his profits or income in respect of which tax is chargeable, shall be the full

amount of the profits or income which was derived by him or arose or accrued to his

benefit from such source during that year of assessment, notwithstanding that he may

have ceased to possess such source or that such source may have ceased to produce

income.

Accordingly, what can be computed is only the statutory income of a person for the assessment

is chargeable with tax. This is stipulated in Section 3.

For further clarity, the relevant part of Section 3 is reproduced below and reads thus;

“3. For the purpose of this Act, “profits and income” or “profits” or “income”

means-

(a) the profits from any trade, business, profession or vocation for however short a

period carried on or exercised; ....

(e) dividends, interest or discounts; ....” [Emphasis is mine]

In this case, as claimed by the Appellant and also admitted by the Respondent, the said dividend

income is already subjected to levy of income tax; thus, income generated by investing in the

other company is deducted by the other companies only after paying dividends; therefore,

Section 65 deals with such situations.

8

For clarity, the relevant parts of Section 65 are reproduced below and reads thus;

65. (1) Every resident company, other than a unit trust or mutual fund approved by the

Securities and Exchange Commission of Sri Lanka, shall deduct from the amount of

gross dividend payable to any shareholder, other than—

(a) any company or body of persons which is exempt from income tax under

paragraph (a) or paragraph (c) of section 7;

(b) any unit trust or mutual fund approved by the Securities and Exchange

Commission of Sri Lanka;

(c) the Api Wenuwen Api Fund established by the Api Wenuwen Api Fund Act,

No. 6 of 2008;

(d) any registered society referred to in paragraph (h) of section 7, during the

period referred to in that paragraph;

(e) any person who is exempt from income tax under section 10 in respect of

any dividend received by such person as referred to in that section.

in the form of money or an order to pay money, income tax equal to ten per centum

of such gross dividend:

Provided that, in determining for the purposes of this subsection, the amount of gross

dividend in relation to any dividend payable by any resident company, no account shall

be taken of such part of that dividend, if any, as is paid by any other resident company

and received by the first mentioned resident company, either directly or through one or

more intermediary companies. ... [Emphasis is mine]

Under Section 65, the dividend is subject to income tax already charged on the dividends paid

by the relevant first company, then the Appellant, who derives such dividend income from the

9

first company, having already paid 10% of the dividend which it should have gotten if it was

not subject to tax as 100%. Therefore, only 90% is now received as dividend income. Thus, if

it is subject to income tax again as part of the statutory income of the Appellant in terms of

Section 3(a), it amounts to double taxation.1

The IR Act provides the exception for such scenario in Section 63, as relied upon by the

Appellant. Now, I will cite the same below;

63. Where a dividend is paid by any resident company to any resident or non-resident

company, and either—

(a) a deduction has been made under section 65 in respect of that dividend by

the first mentioned resident company;

(b) that dividend is exempt from income tax under section 10;

(c) such dividend consists of any part of the amount of a dividend received by

the first-mentioned resident company from another resident company; or

(d) such dividend is a dividend declared by a quoted public company,

profits and income from such dividend shall, notwithstanding anything to the

contrary in any other provision of this Act, be deemed not to form part of the total

statutory income of the second mentioned company.

For the purpose of this section the profits and income from such dividends which

form part of the profits under section 3(a) of this Act, means profits and income after

1John Keells Holdings PLC v. Commissioner General of Inland Revenue (2022) CA/TAX/0026/2013 (CA Minutes 16.03.2022); Hayleys Advantis Limited v. Commissioner General of Inland Revenue (2026) CA/TAX/0004/2023 (CA Minutes 14.05.2026).

10

deducting expenses in ascertaining the profits from such business of receiving

dividends. [Emphasis is mine]

According to the above Section, if the dividends received by the second company is already

subject to income tax, then, the same dividend cannot be subject to income tax when such

dividends is received by the resident company, like the Assessee-Appellant in this case.

To buttress my view, I rely upon the observations made by His Lordship Justice S.U.B.

Karalliyadde in the case of Colombo Fort Land and Building PLC v. Commissioner General

of Inland Revenue [2024];2

The learned Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the legislature intends to prevent

the same subject from being taxed at multiple stages of the same tax chain. When a

company generates profits, the tax is charged by way of corporate tax, and when the

learned Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the legislature intends to prevent the

same subject from being taxed at multiple stages of the same tax chain. When a

company generates profits, the tax is charged by way of corporate tax, and when

distributing the dividends, the subsidiary company pays withholding tax. The argument

of the learned Counsel for the Appellant is that charging tax from the Appellant on

dividends in this set-up where the subsidiary companies have already paid the tax

amount to double taxation.

The position of the learned DSG for the Respondent is that, as argued in Questions of

Law numbers III, IV and VII the dividend and interest income should be recognised

under Section 3(a), however, the exemption for dividend income was introduced under

Section 63 only after the Amendment Act, No. 9 of 2015. The learned Counsel appearing

for the Appellant argued that the explicit exclusion of Section 3(a) under Section 63 is

2 CA/TAX/20/2022 (CA Minute 24.10.2024).

11

a mere clarification provided, all forms of dividend income has been exempted from tax

under the Act. Therefore, regardless of which subsection the income has been

recognized, it should be excluded. This Court observes that the literal interpretation of

the legislature has not excluded the dividend income under Section 3(a) (at page 16).

Therefore, it should be exempted from the statutory income.

Accordingly, it is my view as argued by the Appellant, that the income derived as dividend

income should be exempted in terms of Section 63 of the IR Act; otherwise, there will be

double taxation, resulting in discouraging investments.

Accordingly, question (ii) is answered in the affirmative in favour of the Appellant.

Question (iii) and (iv) - Equity Advance Grants

The Appellant claims that it has advanced certain money to some of its subsidiary companies

as equity advanced loans which will be converted into shares, and therefore, unless and until it

gets paid as dividends in the future, it does not get any income from such advances. It has done

so as an investment company to assist its subsidiary companies, which is well-documented

according to the return.

As such, according to the Appellant, such investments or advance money cannot be treated as

investments by which the Appellant generates an income or incurs a loss though the Assessor

(the Assistant Commissioner) assessed it on that, and the Respondent treated it as such, and

was further confirmed by the TAC in terms of Section 104 of the IR Act.

Now I will consider that.

According to the Appellant, being an investment company and is the main investment company

of the conglomerate, to assist its subsidiary companies, it has paid certain equity advance

payments to various subsidies, which is well-documented and referred to in the returns.

12

However, it is the position of the Assessor that it should be presumed that the Appellant had

derived certain income at least as interest based on the advance money given as loans. Even

the TAC is of the same view that even if the subsidiary companies had obtained loans from the

open market, it would have paid interest on those loans; therefore, the Appellant should have

received some income from those equity advance payments as interest. Accordingly, the

Appellant has been assessed.

However, it is the contention of the Appellant on the other hand that such money has been

advanced only for the purpose of assisting the subsidiary companies and one day it would be

converted into equities; therefore, when they are converted into equities, only the Appellant

will get dividends. As such, unless and until the Appellant gets dividends, it cannot be assessed;

in addition, it cannot be treated as loans on which the Appellant has gotten some interests.

Therefore, assessing in that way of hypothetical basis or speculations is erroneous in terms of

Section 104 of the IR Act.

According to Section 104 of the IR Act, the Assessor claims that she has calculated the profit

earned from the advance loan investment effected by the Assessee to one of its subsidiaries,

and the Assessor further claims that the Assessor has used the arm’s length concept.

For further clarity, Section 104 is reproduced, which reads thus;

104. (1) Any profits and income arising, derived or accruing from, or any loss incurred

in any international transaction entered into between two associated undertakings

shall be ascertained having regard to the arm’s length price.

Nevertheless, such speculative concept cannot be used unless there is a procedure to be

followed in terms of Section 104(2).

For further clarity, Section 104(2) is reproduced, which reads thus;

13

104. (2) Where it appears to an Assessor or Assistant Commissioner that the profits

and income or the loss referred to in subsection (1), has not been as ascertained having

regard to the arm’s length price, he may refer the computation of the arm’s length price

in relation to such international transaction to a Transfer Pricing Officer. The

Transfer Pricing Officer may, in writing addressed to the person who carries on either

the one or the other or both of the two associated undertakings referred to in subsection

(1), require him to prove to the satisfaction of the Transfer pricing Officer, that such

profits and income or such loss, as the case may be, has in fact been ascertained having

regard to the arm’s length price. Where such person fails to so prove, the Transfer

Pricing Officer may determine the arm’s length price and inform it to the Assessor or

Assistant Commissioner. Thereupon the Assessor or Assistant Commissioner may

estimate the amount of the profit and income or the loss, as the case may be, referred

to in subsection (1), and make an assessment accordingly.

Even the concept of an arm’s length price can be applied only to international transactions

under this Section, because the Appellant and its subsidiary are involved only in a Municipal

transaction; however, the concept of arm's length transactions does not arise because the

Assessee has not physically received any money thereof and there is no proof thereof either.

Therefore, this Section will not apply. Thus, the following concept or test used to ascertain the

profit on a speculative manner is erroneous.

Accordingly, questions (iii) and (iv) are also answered in the affirmative in favour of the

Appellant.

In light of the reasons mentioned above, I answered the questions based in the Case Stated as

follows;

Question (ii) - Affirmative

14

Question (iii) - Affirmative

Question (iv) - Affirmative

Conclusion

For the reasons adumbrated above, this Appeal is allowed without costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

M.C.B.S. Morais, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL