==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/CPA/0009/2023

Page 1 of 22

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for the exercise of

the revisionary jurisdiction in terms of Article 138

of the Constitution read together with the

provisions of the High Court of the Provinces

(Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990.

K. A. D. Darshana Anid,

No. 34. Sevanagala North,

Sevanagala

Applicant

Vs.

1. Lanka Sugar Company (Pvt) Limited,

No. 27, Melbourne Avenue,

Colombo 4.

2. Lanka Sugar Company (Pvt) Limited,

Sevanagala Sugar Factory,

Sevanagala.

3. Sevanagala Sugar Industries Limited,

No. 362, Colombo Road,

Pepiliyana.

4. Sevanagala Sugar Industries Limited,

Sevanagala Sugar Factory,

Sevanagala.

Respondents

Court of Appeal Case No: CA/CPA/0009/2023 (CA/CPA/0010/2023) HC ALT No: HCR/LTA/2/2018 LT Case No: 6E/4769/2003

CA/CPA/0009/2023

Page 2 of 22

AND THEN BETWEEN

1. Lanka Sugar Company (Pvt) Limited

No. 27, Melbourne Avenue,

Colombo 4.

2. Lanka Sugar Company (Pvt) Limited,

Sevanagala Sugar Factory,

Sevanagala.

3. Sevanagala Sugar Industries Limited,

No. 362, Colombo Road,

Pepiliyana.

Respondent-Appellants

Vs.

K. A. D. Darshana Anid,

No. 34. Sevanagala North,

Sevanagala

Applicant-Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

K. A. D. Darshana Anid,

No. 34. Sevanagala North,

Sevanagala

Applicant-Respondent-Petitioner

CA/CPA/0009/2023

Page 3 of 22

Vs.

1. Lanka Sugar Company (Pvt) Limited

No. 27, Melbourne Avenue,

Colombo 4.

2. Sevanagala Sugar Industries Limited,

No. 362, Colombo Road,

Pepiliyana.

Respondent-Appellant-Respondents

Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J. K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J. Counsel : Nishika Fonseka instructed by Lakmini

Amarasinghe on behalf of the Legal Aid Commission for the Applicant-Respondent-Petitioner. Pasindu Widyananda with Shalani Jayasinghe instructed by Ranga Jayasena for the 1st Respondent-Appellant-Respondent. Written Submissions of the Applicant-Respondent -Petitioner tendered on : 13.06.2024 and 03.03.2026 Written Submissions of the 1st and 2nd Respondent- Appellant-Respondents tendered on : 05.06.2024 and 11.02.2026 Decided on : 06.03.2026

CA/CPA/0009/2023

Page 4 of 22

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

When the instant application in revision came on before us for support of the

application for notice, the 1st and 2nd Respondent-Appellant-Respondents

(hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the 1st and 2nd Respondents”) who had

come to Court on direct notices, had indicated to Court that they wish to raise

an objection with regard to the jurisdiction of this Court over the instant

matter. This Court then, directed parties to file written submissions on the

jurisdictional objection so raised by the 1st and 2nd Respondents and the

written submissions had thus, had been filed in Court by the parties. Today,

this matter comes on before us for order on the jurisdictional issue so raised

to Court by the 1st and 2nd Respondents.

Let me now, examine the nature of the jurisdictional issue so raised to Court by

the 1st and 2nd Respondents.

As is discernible from the written submissions of the 1st and 2nd Respondents,

the jurisdictional issue is based on section 31DD of the Industrial Disputes Act

No. 43 of 1950 as amended (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Industrial

Disputes Act’) to be read with section 9 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special

Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 as amended (hereinafter called and referred to as

‘the Act’) in that it was contended that direct appeal will lie to the Supreme Court

from the order sought to be impugned in the instant application in revision and

therefore, revision will not lie and hence, this Court is bereft of any jurisdiction

to hear and determine the instant application in revision and therefore, it should

be dismissed in-limine. The 1st and 2nd Respondents sought to rely on the

decision in SC/Appeal/65/2025-SC-Minutes of 10.10.2025 in support of the

jurisdictional objection.

On the other hand, it was contended in the written submissions by the Petitioner

in resisting the jurisdictional objection that the Petitioner did not seek to by-pass

the appellate structure in that he had first invoked the jurisdiction of the

Supreme Court and thereafter approached this Court invoking its revisionary

CA/CPA/0009/2023

Page 5 of 22

jurisdiction only after full disclosure of all material facts and therefore, he came

to this Court with clean hands invoking not a technical device but the

constitutional supervisory jurisdiction designed to prevent grave miscarriage of

justice and therefore, denying him a hearing on jurisdictional grounds at this

stage would leave the Petitioner who had been seeking justice in the instant

matter for over 20 years, without any effective judicial recourse. The Petitioner

sought to rely on the decision in SC/Appeal/111/2015-SC-Minutes of

27.05.2020 to resist the jurisdictional objection.

It is to be noted at this juncture, that learned Counsel for the Applicant-

Respondent-Petitioner in the connected application in revision bearing No.

CA/CPA/0010/23 informed Court that the Applicant-Respondent-Petitioner will

abide by the decision of this Court in the present application in revision, namely;

CA/CPA/0009/23. Hence, order in the instant application in revision will bind

the Applicant-Respondent-Petitioner in the connected application in revision

bearing No. CA/CPA/0010/23 too, as indicated to Court by learned Counsel.

The Petitioner in the instant application in revision seeks to revise and set aside

the Judgement dated 25.10.2022, made by the learned High Court Judge of the

Sabaragamuwa Province holden at Embilipitiya in an Appeal bearing No. LTA

02/2021 in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by section 31D(3)

of the Industrial Dispute Act to be read with section 3 of the Act and the Articles

154P(3)(b) and 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Constitution”), and to affirm

the order of the Labour Tribunal of Rathnapura/ Embilipitiya dated 15.03.2018,

a certified copy of which was annexed to the petition furnished to this Court by

Petitioner marked as P1(l) (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the MC order”)

whereby, the learned High Court Judge of the Sabaragamuwa Province holden

at Embilipitiya had made order allowing the appeal and setting aside the order

of the Labour Tribunal of Rathnapura/ Embilipitiya dated 15.03.2018, (P1(l)).

CA/CPA/0009/2023

Page 6 of 22

It is not in dispute that the order impugned (P2) is a final order made by the

learned High Court Judge of the Sabaragamuwa Province holden at Embilipitiya

in an appeal bearing No. LTA 02/2021 in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction

vested in it by section 31D(3) of the Industrial Dispute Act to be read with section

3 of the Act and the Articles 154P(3)(b) and 138 of the Constitution.

The pertinent question that would now, arise for our consideration is whether

an order made by a High Court established by Article 154P of the

Constitution in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by

section 31D(3) of the Industrial Dispute Act to be read with section 3 of the

Act and the Articles 154P(3)(b) and 138 of the Constitution in respect of an

order of the Labour Tribunal, is amendable to an extra-ordinary revisionary

jurisdiction of this Court when section 31DD of the Industrial Dispute Act

to be read with sections 9 and 10 of the Act and Articles 127 and 128(4) of

the Constitution “expressly”, confers upon a party aggrieved by such an

order a right of appeal to the Supreme Court with leave of the High Court

or the Supreme Court first had and obtained. [Emphasis is mine]

Article 138(1) of the Constitution enacts that,

“The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise subject to the provisions of

the Constitution or of any law, an appellate jurisdiction for the correction

of all errors in fact or in law which shall be [committed by the High Court,

in the exercise of its appellate or original jurisdiction or by any Court of

First Instance], tribunal or other institution and sole and exclusive

cognizance, by way of appeal, revision and restitutio in integrum, of all

causes, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things [of which such

High Court, Court of First Instance], tribunal or other institution may have

taken cognizance...”

Proviso-not reproduced.

CA/CPA/0009/2023

Page 7 of 22

It was inter-alia, held by the Supreme Court in Weragama v. Eksath Lanka

Wathu Kamkam Samithiya and others-1994[1] SLR 329, that “….however,

the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal under Article 138 is not an entrenched

jurisdiction, because Article 138 provides that it is subject to the provisions “of

any law"; hence it was always constitutionally permissible for that jurisdiction

to be reduced or transferred by ordinary law (of course, to a body entitled to

exercise judicial power). That is the reason why I held in Swastika Textile

Industries Ltd. v. Dayaratne, that section 3 of the High Court of the Provinces

(Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990, conferred concurrent, appellate and

revisionary jurisdiction on the High Courts in respect of Labour Tribunals, and

that thereafter section 31D3 of the Industrial Disputes Act, as amended by Act

No. 32 of 1990, made that jurisdiction exclusive, thereby taking away the

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal in that respect.

It was inter-alia, held by the Supreme Court in SC/Appeal/65/2025-Decided

on 10.10.2025 at page 32 that, “In this context, it would be legally

impermissible and institutionally unsound for the Court of Appeal, in pari

materia, to sit in appeal over judgments and orders pronounced by a Provincial

High Court in the exercise of its appellate or revisionary jurisdiction. A party

cannot pursue successive appeals before two courts of coordinate jurisdiction in

respect of the same matter. This strikes at the very root of the issue. Such a

practice is inimical to legislative intent, imposes unnecessary burdens on the

judicial system, and undermines the principle of finality in litigation. These

considerations make clear that concurrent jurisdiction was intended to provide

an alternative forum for appellate review, not to create an additional tier in the

appellate hierarchy.”.

Hence, it becomes manifest that the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal under

Article 138 is not entrenched and therefore, not absolute and as such it is

inherently, conditional and it can thus, be altered by ordinary law as held by

Supreme Court in Weragama v. Eksath Lanka Wathu Kamkam Samithiya and

CA/CPA/0009/2023

Page 8 of 22

others (Supra) and in Swasthika Textiles Industries Ltd Vs Dayaratne-1993

[2] SLR 348

The Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution enacted Article 154P(1) to the

Constitution and it reads thus;

“There shall be a High Court for each Province with effect from the date on

which this Chapter comes into force. Each such High Court shall be

designated as the High Court of the relevant Province.”

Hence, Article 154P(1) of the Constitution so enacted by the Thirteenth

Amendment, made provisions for the establishment of the High Courts in the

provinces.

Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution enacted by the Thirteenth Amendment to

the Constitution, reads thus;

“Every such High Court shall –

(b) notwithstanding anything in Article 138 and subject to any law,

exercise, appellate and revisionary jurisdiction in respect of convictions,

sentences and orders entered or imposed by Magistrates Courts and

Primary Courts within the Province;” [Emphasis is mine]

Hence, Article 154P(3)(b) conferred upon the High Court so established under

Article 154P(1) the appellate and revisionary jurisdiction in respect of

convictions, sentences and orders entered or imposed by Magistrates Courts and

Primary Courts within the Province notwithstanding anything in Article 138

and subject to any law. [Emphasis is mine]

Article 154P(6) of the Constitution enacted by Thirteenth Amendment to the

Constitution confers upon any person aggrieved by a final order, judgment or

sentence of any such High Court so established under Article 154P(1) of the

Constitution made in the exercise of its jurisdiction under paragraphs (3)(b) or

CA/CPA/0009/2023

Page 9 of 22

(3)(c) or (4) a right of appeal to the Court of Appeal in accordance with Article

138 of the Constitution subject to the provisions of the Constitution and any law

and it reads thus;

“(6) subject to the provisions of the Constitution and any law, any

person aggrieved by a final order, judgment or sentence of any such Court,

in the exercise of its jurisdiction under paragraphs (3)(b) or (3)(c) or (4) may

appeal there from to the Court of Appeal in accordance with Article 138.”

[Emphasis is mine]

However, no provision was made with regard to the procedure to be followed in

such High Courts. With a view to providing for the lacuna in the law with regard

to the procedure to be followed in the High Court of the Provinces, so established

under Article 154P(1) of the Constitution which enacted by the Thirteenth

Amendment to the Constitution, the High Court of the Provinces (Special

Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990 (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Act”)

was enacted making provision “regarding the procedure to be followed in, and

the right to appeal to, and from, the High Court established under Article 154P

of the Constitution”.

The Act also made provision for the appeals to be brought in before the Court of

Appeal as well as the Supreme Court from the High Court. While section 9 of the

Act provides for the appeals to Supreme Court from High Court, section 11

thereof provides for appeals to Court of Appeal from the High Court established

under Article 154P of the Constitution.

Section 9 of the Act reads thus;

“9. Subject to the provisions of this Act or any other law, any person

aggrieved by

(a) a final order, judgment, decree or sentence of a High Court

established by Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise of the

CA/CPA/0009/2023

Page 10 of 22

appellate jurisdiction vested in it by paragraph (3) (b) of Article 154P of the

Constitution or section 3 of this Act or any other law, in any matter or

proceeding whether civil or criminal which involves a substantial question

of law, may appeal therefrom to the Supreme Court if the High Court

grants leave to appeal to the Supreme Court ex mero motu or at the

instance of any aggrieved party to such matter or proceedings :

Provided that the Supreme Court may, in its discretion, grant special

leave to appeal to the Supreme Court from “any final” or

“interlocutory order”, judgment, decree or sentence made by such High

Court, in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by paragraph

(3) (b) of Article 154P of the Constitution or section 3 of this Act, or any

other law where such High Court has refused to grant leave to appeal

to the Supreme Court, or where in the opinion of the Supreme Court,

the case or matter is fit for review by the Supreme Court:

Provided further that the Supreme Court shall grant leave to appeal in

every matter or proceeding in which it is satisfied that the question to be

decided is of public or general importance; and

(b) a final order, judgment or sentence of a High Court established by

Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise of its jurisdiction conferred

on it by paragraph (3) (a), or (4) of Article 154P of the Constitution may

appeal therefrom to the Court of Appeal.”[Emphasis is mine]

Section 10 of the Act which sets out the powers of the Supreme Court on appeal,

enacts thus;

“(1) The Supreme Court shall, subject to the Constitution be the final Court

of appellate jurisdiction within Sri Lanka for the correction of all errors in

fact or in law which shall be committed by a High Court established by

Article 154P of the Constitution, in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction

vested in it by paragraph (3) (b) of Article 154P of the Constitution or

CA/CPA/0009/2023

Page 11 of 22

section 3 of this Act, or any other law and the judgments and orders of the

Supreme Court shall, in such cases, be final and conclusive in all such

matters.

(2) The Supreme Court shall, in the exercise of its jurisdiction, have sole

and exclusive cognizance by way of appeal from any order, judgment,

decree or sentence made by a High Court established by Article 154P of

the Constitution, in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in such

High Court by paragraph (3) (b) of Article 154P of the Constitution or

section 3 of this Act or any other law and it may affirm, reverse or vary any

such order, judgment, decree or sentence of such High Court and may

issue such directions to such High Court or Court of First Instance or

order a new trial or further hearing in any proceedings as justice may

require and may also call for and admit fresh or additional evidence if the

interests of justice so demands and may in such event, direct that such

evidence be recorded by such High Court, or any Court of First Instance.”

Section 3 of the Act enacts thus;

“A High Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution for a Province

shall, subject to any law, exercise appellate and revisionary jurisdiction

in respect of orders made by Labour Tribunals within that Province

and orders made under section 5 or section 9 of the Agrarian Services Act,

No. 58 of 1979, in respect of any land situated within that Province”.

[Emphasis is mine]

Article 127 of the Constitution which sets out the appellate jurisdiction of the

Supreme Court, enacts thus;

“(1) The Supreme Court shall, subject to the Constitution, be the final

Court of civil and criminal appellate jurisdiction for and within the

Republic of Sri Lanka for the correction of all errors in fact or in law which

shall be committed by the Court of Appeal or any Court of First Instance,

CA/CPA/0009/2023

Page 12 of 22

tribunal or other institution and the judgments and orders of the

Supreme Court shall in all cases be final and conclusive in all such

matters.” [Emphasis is mine]

(2)Not Reproduced.

Article 128(4) of the Constitution enacts thus;

“An appeal shall lie directly to the Supreme Court on any matter and in

the manner specifically provided for by any other law passed by

Parliament.” [Emphasis is mine]

Section 31DD(1) of the Industrial Dispute’s Act 43 of 1950 (as amended) enacts

thus;

“Any workman, trade union or employer who is aggrieved “by any final

order” of a High Court established under Article 154P of the Constitution,

in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by law or in

the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by law, in relation

to an order of a labour tribunal, may appeal therefrom to the Supreme

Court with the leave of the High Court or the Supreme Court first had

and obtained.”

Upon a careful analysis of section 9(a) of the Act, it becomes manifestly, clear

that, subject to the provisions of the Act or any other law, any person aggrieved

by a final order, judgment, decree or sentence of a High Court established by

Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested

in it by paragraph (3)(b) of Article 154P of the Constitution or section 3 of the

Act or any other law, in any matter or proceeding whether civil or criminal which

involves a substantial question of law, may appeal therefrom to the Supreme

Court if the High Court grants leave to appeal to the Supreme Court ex

mero motu or at the instance of any aggrieved party to such matter or

proceedings.

CA/CPA/0009/2023

Page 13 of 22

Similar provision can be found in section 31DD(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act

as amended which provides that “Any workman, trade union or employer who is

aggrieved “by any final order” of a High Court established under Article 154P

of the Constitution, in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it

by law or in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by law, in

relation to an order of a labour tribunal, may appeal therefrom to the Supreme

Court with the leave of the High Court or the Supreme Court first had and

obtained.”.[Emphasis is mine]

Article 128(4) of the Constitution also makes similar provision which enacts

thus;

“An appeal shall lie directly to the Supreme Court on any matter and in

the manner specifically provided for by any other law passed by

Parliament.” [Emphasis is mine]

Section 31DD(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act is “any other law passed by

parliament” as envisaged by Article 128(4) of the Constitution and therefore, it

inevitably, follows that an appeal shall lie “directly” to the Supreme Court

thereunder from an order of a High Court established under Article 154P of the

Constitution made in the exercise of appellate jurisdiction vested in it by law or

in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by law in relation to an

order of a Labour Tribunal on any matter and in the manner specifically

provided for by it as enumerated above. [Emphasis is mine]

The cumulative effect of the provisions enumerated above, is to expressly, and

unambiguously, provide for a right of appeal “only” and “directly” to the

Supreme Court from a final order made by a High Court established under

Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction vested

in it by law or in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by law in

relation to an order of a Labour Tribunal on any matter and in the manner

specifically provided for by it as enumerated above. [Emphasis is mine]

CA/CPA/0009/2023

Page 14 of 22

The pertinent question that would then, arise for our consideration is; What was

the specific objective that the legislature intended to achieve by expressly,

unequivocally and unambiguously, providing for a right of appeal “only” and

“directly” to the apex Court in the judicial hierarchy of this country-the Supreme

Court, to an aggrieved party by enacting section 31DD of the Industrial Dispute

Act to be read with section 9(a) of the Act and Articles 127 and 128(4) of the

Constitution “from a final order” made by a High Court established by Article

154P of the Constitution in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it

by law as morefully enumerative above, in relation to an order of the labour

tribunal with leave of the High Court or the Supreme Court first had and

obtained?.

In my view, the specific objective intended to be achieved by the legislature

thereby, was to arrest delays in the administration of justice by conferring

finality upon a matters under review for; the judgments and orders of the

Supreme Court shall in all cases be final and conclusive in all such matters.”

as enumerated by Article 127(1) of the Constitution which would in turn, result

in the early and expeditious disposal of the disputes arising out of labour matters

for; resolution of disputes as such expeditiously, is an essential element for the

smooth and fast economic growth of this Country. [Emphasis is mine]

The question that would next arise for our consideration in view of the

jurisdictional objection so raised to us by the 1st and 2nd Respondents would be;

in the light of the law set out above, does the Court of Appeal have a

revisionary jurisdiction in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution in

respect of a decision of the Provincial High Court made in the exercise

of the appellate jurisdiction in terms of section 31D of the Industrial

Dispute Act No. 43 of 1950 as amended?. [Emphasis is mine]

It was observed by the Supreme Court in Gunawardane And Others Vs.

Muthukumarana and Others (Supra) at page 314 that, “At the outset, it must be

CA/CPA/0009/2023

Page 15 of 22

borne in mind that the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal is a

Constitutional mandate. Its genesis lies in Article 138 of the Constitution. There is

no question that the Constitution is the supreme law of the land (vide In Re

Reference under Article 125(1) of the Constitution. In those circumstances, any

ouster or restriction of a Court's jurisdiction which is founded on the Constitution,

in so far as it is permitted under the Constitution, must be made in express

language. In Re the Nineteenth Amendment to the Constitution, a bench of 7 judges

unequivocally opined that "This manifests a cardinal rule that applies to the

interpretation of a Constitution, that there can be no implied amendment of any

provision of the Constitution" (at page 110). Therefore, it is only right and befitting

that this Court insists that every provision which restricts or modifies a Court's

Constitutional mandate is express and set out in no uncertain terms.”.

It is in this context, I would think it expedient at this juncture to direct my

judicial mind to the observations explicitly, made by the Supreme Court in a

later case in W.T.S. Nilantha Fernando Vs. P.M.S. Nilanthi Perera (Supra),

dealing with the observations so made by the Supreme Court in Gunawardane

v. Muthukumarana (Supra), and they may be reproduced verbatim the same as

follows to the extent that would be necessary for the proper resolution of the

jurisdictional objection so raised by the Respondent before us as enumerated

above;

“The Court of Appeal relied heavily on the judgment of this court in

Gunawardane v. Muthukumarana [2020] 3 Sri LR 306 in overruling the

preliminary objection raised by the defendant on jurisdiction. In that case,

at page 310, this court held as follows: Section 9 of the High Court of the

Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990, as amended, does not

oust the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal in respect of decisions

made by a Provincial High Court exercising its appellate powers. Therefore,

the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal referred to in Article 138

of the Constitution of the Republic of Sri Lanka can be invoked in order to

CA/CPA/0009/2023

Page 16 of 22

canvass a decision made by a Provincial High Court exercising its appellate

powers.

With all due respect, I am unable to agree with that conclusion. That

judgment is predominantly premised on the conceptual separation of

revision from appeal, in the manner adopted by Sansoni C.J. in the oft

quoted decision in Mariam Beebee v. Seyed Mohomed (1965) 68 NLR 36,

where it was observed at page 38:

The power of revision is an extraordinary power which is quite independent

of and distinct from the appellate jurisdiction of this Court. Its object is the

due administration of justice and the correction of errors, sometimes

committed by this Court itself, in order to avoid miscarriages of justice. It is

exercised in some cases by a Judge of his own motion, when an aggrieved

person who may not be a party to the action brings to his notice the fact that,

unless the power is exercised, injustice will result. The Partition Act has not,

I conceive, made any change in this respect, and the power can still be

exercised in respect of any order or decree of a lower Court.

When Mariam Beebee v. Seyed Mohomed was decided in 1965, Sri Lanka

was governed by the Soulbury Constitution. Neither the Soulbury

Constitution nor the First Republican Constitution of 1972 contained any

provision equivalent to Article 138 of the present Constitution of 1978, which

expressly enacts the appellate, revisionary, and restitutio in integrum

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal, to be exercised “subject to the provisions

of the Constitution or of any law.”

Indeed, the Supreme Court in Gunawardane, at page 314, acknowledged:

“At the outset, it must be borne in mind that the revisionary jurisdiction of

the Court of Appeal is a Constitutional mandate. Its genesis lies in Article

138 of the Constitution.” However, both the Supreme Court in Gunawardane

and the Court of Appeal in the instant case failed to properly appreciate that

CA/CPA/0009/2023

Page 17 of 22

Article 138 is not an entrenched provision but an enabling one. Article 138(1)

itself makes plain that the appellate jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal “by

way of appeal, revision and restitutio in integrum” is “subject to the

provisions of the Constitution or of any law”. Nevertheless, both courts

proceeded on the footing that, in the absence of an express exclusion, the

Court of Appeal continues to retain revisionary jurisdiction over judgments

of the Provincial High Court.

At page 316 of Gunawardane, it was further stated: “As I observed earlier,

the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal is a Constitutional

mandate which, undoubtedly, is subject to the provisions of statutory law.

Nevertheless, owing to its genesis in the Constitution, any restriction or

modification which the Legislature seeks to introduce must be introduced by

way of express wording.” In my view, this reasoning is untenable. Whilst

conferring revisionary jurisdiction on the Court of Appeal, the Constitution

itself expressly stipulates that such jurisdiction is “subject to the provisions

of the Constitution or of any law.” When the Constitution at the outset makes

clear that the revisionary jurisdiction is conditional and not absolute, there

is no need for express words of exclusion. Parliament, by ordinary

legislation, is empowered to regulate, modify, or reallocate such jurisdiction.

To hold otherwise would elevate Article 138(1) to a status of entrenchment

which the Constitution has not conferred.

This is consistent with the principle affirmed in Swasthika Textile Industries

Ltd v. Dayaratne, where the Supreme Court held that appellate and

revisionary jurisdiction under Article 138(1) is not entrenched and can be

altered by ordinary law. In that case, the Supreme Court held that section

31DD, introduced into the Industrial Disputes Act by Act No. 32 of 1990,

which provides that: “Any workman, trade union or employer who is

aggrieved by any final order of a High Court established under Article 154P

of the Constitution, in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it

CA/CPA/0009/2023

Page 18 of 22

by law or in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by law, in

relation to an order of a Labour Tribunal, may appeal therefrom to the

Supreme Court with the leave of the High Court or the Supreme Court first

had and obtained”, removed the appellate and revisionary jurisdiction of the

Court of Appeal in respect of final orders of the High Court made in relation

to orders of Labour Tribunals, and vested such jurisdiction exclusively in the

Supreme Court. In that instance also, there was no express removal of the

revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal. This position was

subsequently accepted as correct by a Bench of five Judges of this court in

Abeywardene v. Ajith De Silva [1998] 1 Sri LR 134 at 140.

As I have emphasised repeatedly, Provincial High Courts were vested with

special jurisdiction under Acts Nos. 19 of 1990, 10 of 1996, and 54 of 2006

with the specific objective of arresting delays in the administration of justice.

Sansoni C.J. in Mariam Beebee v. Seyed Mohomed did not recognise the

revisionary power as an absolute and unqualified principle of law; rather,

His Lordship acknowledged that its exercise is subject to legislative intent.

This is apparent from his explicit observation in the above excerpt that “The

Partition Act has not, I conceive, made any change in this respect, and the

power [of revision] can still be exercised in respect of any order or decree of

a lower Court”, thus recognising that the legislature could, through statute,

alter or limit the scope of revisionary powers.

Unlike the Partition Act considered in Mariam Beebee, Acts Nos. 19 of 1990,

10 of 1996, and 54 of 2006 expressly restructure appellate jurisdiction and,

by their terms, exclude any intermediate recourse to the Court of Appeal

from judgments and orders of Provincial High Courts exercising their

appellate jurisdiction. The legislative design, read together with the enabling

nature of Article 138, leaves no scope for the Court of Appeal to invoke its

appellate, revisionary or restitutio in integrum jurisdiction in such instances,

CA/CPA/0009/2023

Page 19 of 22

without disregarding the clear statutory command and frustrating the very

object of the Provincial High Court scheme.”

I would therefore, hold following the decision of a bench of five judges of the

Supreme Court in Abeywardene v. Ajith De Silva 1998 [1] SLR 134 at Page

140 and the decision of the Supreme Court in Swasthika Textile Industries

Ltd v. Dayaratne (Supra) and the recent decision of the Supreme Court in

W.T.S. Nilantha Fernando Vs. P.M.S. Nilanthi Perera (Supra), that while

conferring revisionary jurisdiction on the Court of Appeal, the Constitution itself

expressly enunciates that such jurisdiction is “subject to the provisions of the

Constitution or of any law” and therefore, its exercise is subject to legislative

intent; and that when the Constitution at the outset makes clear that the

revisionary jurisdiction is conditional and not absolute, there is no need for

express words of exclusion; and that Parliament, by ordinary legislation, is thus,

empowered to regulate, modify, or re-allocate such jurisdiction; and that to hold

otherwise would elevate Article 138(1) to a status of entrenchment which the

Constitution has not conferred; and that in the result, appellate and revisionary

jurisdiction under Article 138(1) which is not entrenched, can be altered by

ordinary law; and that more particularly, section 31DD which introduced into

the Industrial Disputes Act by Act No. 32 of 1990, which provides that: “Any

workman, trade union or employer who is aggrieved by any final order of a High

Court established under Article 154P of the Constitution, in the exercise of the

appellate jurisdiction vested in it by law or in the exercise of its revisionary

jurisdiction vested in it by law, in relation to an order of a Labour Tribunal, may

appeal therefrom to the Supreme Court with the leave of the High Court or the

Supreme Court first had and obtained”; to be read with sections 9 and 10 of the

Act and Articles 127(1) and 128(4) of the Constitution had clearly, removed the

revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal in respect of the final orders

of the High Court established under Article 154P of the Constitution, made

in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by section 31D(3) of the

Industrial Dispute Act to be read together with section 3 of the Act or in the

CA/CPA/0009/2023

Page 20 of 22

exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by law in relation to orders of

Labour Tribunals, and vested such jurisdiction “exclusively” in the Supreme

Court for; in that instance too, there was no express removal of the revisionary

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal. [Emphasis is mine]

In view of the jurisdictional objection so raised by the 1st and 2nd Respondents,

the pivotal question that arose before this Court for our consideration is;

Does the Court of Appeal have a revisionary jurisdiction in terms of

Article 138 of the Constitution in respect of an order of the Provincial

High Court made in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction in terms

of section 31D(3) of the Industrial Dispute Act No. 43 of 1950 as

amended to be read with section 3 of the Act?

And therefore, legal effect of section 31DD(1) of the Industrial Dispute’s Act, to

be read with sections 9 and 10 of the Act and Articles 127(1) and 128(4) had

directly, come before us for our consideration, whereas, the pivotal question that

arose before the Supreme Court in the decision in Gunawardane v.

Muthukumarana (Supra) for its consideration was whether “Having failed to

exercise the right to file an appeal in terms of section 9 of the High Court of the

Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 as amended, could a person

invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal referred to in Article

138 of the Constitution of the Republic of Sri Lanka in order to canvass a

decision made by a Provincial High Court exercising its appellate powers?”, and

hence, the legal effect of section 31DD(1) of the Industrial Dispute’s Act, to be

read with sections 9 and 10 of the Act and Articles 127(1) and 128(4) had never

been the subject matter of the said case that had come before the Supreme Court

for its consideration, and therefore, Supreme Court had no occasion to examine

the legal effect of section 31DD(1) of the Industrial Dispute’s Act, to be read with

sections 9 and 10 of the Act and Articles 127(1) and 128(4) and hence, the facts

of this case are different from the facts of the said Supreme Court decision and

therefore, the decision of the Supreme Court in Gunawardane v.

CA/CPA/0009/2023

Page 21 of 22

Muthukumarana (Supra) can clearly, be distinguishable from the facts of the

instant application in revision before us and therefore, I would most respectfully,

and humbly, state that the decision of the Supreme Court in Gunawardane v.

Muthukumarana (Supra) has no bearing on the instant application in revision

before us.

In view of the foregoing, I would hold that the Court of Appeal does not have

revisionary jurisdiction vested in it in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution in

respect of a final order of the Provincial High Court established by Article 154P

of the Constitution and made in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction in terms

of section 31D(3) of the Industrial Dispute Act to be read together with section 3

of the Act and Articles 154P(3)(b) and 138 of the Constitution in relation to an

order of a Labour Tribunal by reason of the fact that section 31DD(1) of the

Industrial Dispute’s Act, to be read with sections 9 and 10 of the Act and Articles

127(1) and 128(4) had clearly, removed the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court

of Appeal in respect of a final order of the High Court established under Article

154P of the Constitution made in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested

in it by section 31D(3) of the Industrial Dispute Act to be read with section 3 of

the Act or in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by law in

relation to orders of Labour Tribunals, and vested such jurisdiction “exclusively”

in the Supreme Court.

In the circumstances, I would hold that the jurisdictional objection so raised by

the 1st and 2nd Respondents is entitled to succeed both in fact and law.

Hence, I would proceed to uphold the same.

In the result, I would dismiss the instant application in revision in limine with

costs.

Since, the Petitioner in the connected application in revision bearing No.

CA/CPA/0010/23 undertook to abide by the order of this Court in the instant

application in revision, I would order that the Petitioner in the connected

CA/CPA/0009/2023

Page 22 of 22

application in revision bearing No. CA/CPA/0010/23 is bound by the order of

the instant application in revision.

In the circumstances, I would dismiss the connected application in revision

bearing No. CA/CPA/0010/23 in limine with costs.

Registrar is directed to file a copy of order of the instant application in revision,

of record in the connected application in revision bearing No. CA/CPA/0010/23.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL