Ij ;1

:1 1 j j j

f 'I ,

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRAIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

In the matter of an appeal under the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act read with section 9 and 11 of the High

Court of Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of

1990

Court of Appeal case no. CAlPHC/83/2015

H.C. Colombo case no. HC RA 129/2014

M.C. Kaduwela case no. 33625IMaintenance

Before

Counsel

Kirineliya Gamage Mahesh,

"Sumudu", Weliwatta, Wattegama, Dikwella.

Respondent Respondent Appellant

Vs.

Muduyanse Arachchilage Shyama Nelum

Kumari Sugathapala,

No.626113, Sarna Place,

Govinna Mawatha, Athuruguriya.

Applicant Petitioner Respondent.

: H.C.J.Madawala J.

: L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

: Kamal Suneth Perera instructed by D.A.P.Weerathne for the

Respondent Respondent Appellant.

: S. Hettiarachchi for the Applicant Petitioner Respondent.

Argued on : 16.01.2017

Written submissions filed on 20th and 23rd January and 01 st February

2

Decided on : 30.05.2017

L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

This is an appeal from the High Court of Colombo.

The Applicant Petitioner Respondent (hereinafter sometimes called

and referred to as the Respondent) filed an application in the Magistrate

Court of Kaduwela under Maintenance Act No. 37 of 1999 and the

Respondent moved in revision in the provincial High Court of Colombo

against the order of the learned Magistrate. The Respondent Respondent

Appellant (hereinafter sometimes called and referred to as the Appellant)

being dissatisfied with the order of the learned High Court Judge made in

the revision application, filed this appeal. The Respondent raised a

preliminary objection on the jurisdiction. His contention is that this Court

has no jurisdiction to hear an appeal from the High Court under section

14(2) of the Maintenance Act No. 37 of 1999

Section 14 of the Maintenance Act, with the side note, reads thus;

Right of Appeal

14. (1) Any person who shall be dissatisfied with any

order made by a Magistrate tinder section 2 or section 11

may prefer an appeal to the relevant High Court

established by Article 154P of the Constitution in like

manner as if the order was a final order pronounced by

Magistrate's Court in a criminal case or matter, and

sections 320 to 330 (both inclusive) and sections 357 and

358 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of

1979 shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to such appeal:

,

! , f t! I1!

I i i tt

~ -f

t, Ii t

3

Provided however, notwithstanding anything to the

contrary in section 323 of the Criminal Procedure Code

Act, No. 15 of 1979 such order under section 2 shall not

be stayed by reason of such appeal, unless the High Court

directs otherwise for reasons to be recorded:

Provided further that the Magistrate in forwarding the

record to the High Court shall retain a copy of his order

for purposes of enforcement.

(2) Any person dissatisfied with an order made by a High

Court in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction under

this section, may prefer an appeal therefrom to the

Supreme Court, on a question of law, with the leave of the

High Court, and where such leave is refused, with the

special leave of the Supreme Court, first had an obtained.

The Respondent's contention is that an appeal from the Provincial

High Court under the Maintenance Act (hereinafter sometimes called and

referred to as the Act) has to be filed in the Supreme Court with leave and

not in this Court. The Appellant argues that an appeal from an order of an

appeal in the High Court lies in the Supreme Court but an appeal from an

order of a revision application made to the High Court lies in the Court of

Appeal.

The section 14 of the Act is on the right of appeal. This section has

given a right to a party dissatisfied with an order of the Magistrate Court to

appeal against and prescribes the procedure.

It is established law that unless otherwise the right to appeal is

granted by law, there is no right of appeal. As per subsection (1) the appeal

against the order of the Magistrate Court lies in the relevant High Court and

4

the procedure to be followed is the procedure prescribed in the Criminal

Procedure Code.

The subsection (2) provides the procedure for an appeal against an

order of the High Court made on such an appeal. The enabling words used

in the subsection (2) are "Any person dissatisfied with an order made by a

High Court in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction under this section"

(emphasis added). This section applies to or the parties who become enable

to appeal under this section are the parties who were dissatisfied with an

order made by the High Court in exercising appellate jurisdiction. The

appellate jurisdiction referred in this section is the appeal made to the High

Court under subsection (1) because the section clearly says that the

"appellate jurisdiction under this section".

The revision does not come under section 14 of the Act. It is a

discretionary remedy made available under the Constitution. The Provincial

High Court was vested with the revisionary jurisdiction on orders made by

the Magistrate Courts within the Province under the Article 154P (3) of the

Constitution. The Article 154P (3) reads;

(3) Every such High Court shall

(a)exercise according to law, the original criminal jurisdiction

of the High Court of Sri Lanka in respect of offences committed

within the Province;

(b)notwithstanding anything in Article 138 and subject to any

law, exercise, appellate and revisionary jurisdiction in respect

of convictions, sentences and orders entered or imposed by

Magistrates Courts and Primary Courts within the Province;

(c)exercise such other jurisdiction and powers as Parliament

may, by law, provide.

5

The reVISIOn application in this case has been made under the

Constitution read with the Provincial High Court (Special Provisions) Act. It

is not under the section 14(2) of the Maintenance Act.

A full bench of the Supreme Court i.n the case of Abeywardene vs.

Ajith de Silva [1998] 1 Sri L R 134 considered the difference between an

appeal and a revision application made to the High Court and held that;

The cumulative effect of the provisions of Articles 154P (3) (b), 154P

(6) and section 9 of Act No. 19 of 1990 is that, while there is a right

of appeal to the Supreme Court from the orders, etc., of the High

Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise

of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154P (3) (b) or

Section 3 of Act No. 19 of 1990 or any other law, there is no right of

appeal to the Supreme Court from the orders in the exercise of the

revisionary jurisdiction. An appeal from an order of the High Court

in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction should be made to the

Court of Appeal. An appeal to the Supreme Court from the decision of

the Court of Appeal would lie, with leave.

It is contended on behalf of the petitioner that the expression

"appellatejurisdiction" (as opposed to "Original Jurisdiction',) would

ordinarily include the power to review decisions by way of appeal,

revision or restitutio in integrum. I do not agree with this submission.

Article 154P (3) (b) refers to "appellate" and "revisionary"

jurisdiction, but "revisionary jurisdiction" is omitted in section 9 of

Act No. 19 of 1990. The omission, in my view, is not inconsequential,

for jurisdiction in respect of revision is distinct from appellate

jurisdiction (Mariam Beebee v. Seyed Mohamed (5) Vide also

Somawathie v. Madawela (6) and Attorney-General v. Podisingho (7)

6

Affirming this decision the Supreme Court held in the case of

Wickramasekara V. OIC Ampara [2004] 1 Sri L R 257 that "The Court of

Appeal does not have appellate jurisdiction in terms of Article 138(1) of the

Constitution read with Article 154(6) in respect of decisions of the

Provincial High Court made in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction and

it is the Supreme Court that has the jurisdiction in respect of appeals from

the Provincial High Court as set out in section 9 of the High Court of the

Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990. " The appellate

jurisdiction exercised by Court of Appeal in respect of the orders made on

revision application in the Provincial High Courts, was not removed.

In the case of Wewalwalahewage Hemantha Ariya Kumara Vs. Kaluappu

Kankanamalage Dona Bernadeth Yamuna Rani Karunarathne SC Spl LA

No. 16912013 decided on 26.03.2014 Dep J. (as he was then) held that;

Therefore it is clear that when the High Court exercises original

criminal jurisdiction under article 154 P (3) (a) or revisionary

jurisdiction under Article 154P (3) (b) of the Constitution, the appeal

lies to the Court of Appeal. On the other hand if it exercises appellate

jurisdiction, appeal lies to the Supreme Court. The case of Gunaratne

Vs. Thambinayagam 1993 (2) SLR 355 settled the law on this issue.

This decision was followed in Abeywardana Vs. Ajith de Silva 1998

(1) SLR 134. Wickremasekara v Officer in Charge, Police Station,

Ampara (2004) 1 SLR 257.

This case being an appeal from an order on a revision application

made to the Provincial High Court, this Court has the jurisdiction to hear

and conclude. I overrule the preliminary objection.

The application of the appellant is that since he has filed art action in

the District Court to declare that the marriage between the Appellant and the

Respondent a nullity, it has to be considered as a change of circumstances

7

under section 8 of the Maintenance Act and wants to stop the payment of

the maintenance ordered by the Magistrate Court. Filing an action cannot be

considered as a Change of circumstances, it is only an attempt to change the

circumstances. Until the case is decided the circumstances will prevail as it

IS.

The Appellant rely on two matters to declare the marriage a nullity.

One is that the Respondent was previously married and therefore the

marriage is a nullity. The Respondent was acquitted from the criminal

prosecution held against her for bigamy. Therefore there is no prima facie

case established on that point. The other reason is that the name of the

Respondent. It is a fact that the Appellant married the Respondent. He did

not marry the name of the Respondent. The name is only to identify the

person. Whatever the name she was called, the Appellant married the

Respondent in person.

Under these circumstances I don't see any reason to interfere with the

findings of the learned High Court Judge dated 22.05.2015.

Accordingly the appeal is dismissed subject to costs fixed at Rs.

10,000.00

Judge of the Court of Appeal

H.C.J. Madawala J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal