! I 1 I I

I ;

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

C.A.No.81/2017

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Section 3310f the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15/1979.

H.C. Monaragala No.22/2016

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

Herath Mudiyanselage Kumara Chandana

Accused-Appellant

Vs. Hon. Attorney General Attorney General's Department Colombo 12 .

Respondent

***********

DEEPALI WIJESUNDERA, J.

ACHALA WENGAPPULI J.

Shanaka Ranasinghe P.C.with Niroshan Mihind ukulasuriya,and Sandamali Peiris for the Accused-Appellant.

Anoopa de Silva S.s.c. for the respondent

17.09.2018

09th November, 2018

****************

1

ACHALA WENGAPPULI J.

The Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the" .t?-ppellant")

invokes the appellate jurisdiction of this Court seeking to set aside his

conviction and sentence imposed by the High Court of Monaragala

pronounced on 18.05.2018.

The indictment presented by the Hon. Attorney General against the

Appellant contains two counts. The 1st count is in relation to committing

house trespass on or about 31st May 2014, in order to commit an offence

punishable for ten years or more while the 2nd count refers to committing

rape on Konara Mudiyanselage Sudu Bandi in the same course of transaction,

an offence punishable under section 364(1) of the Penal Code as amended.

Upon the election of the Appellant to be tried without a jury, the

trial was conducted before a Judge of the High Court. The prosecution

called the prosecutrix who claimed that she is 102 years old at the time of

giving evidence before the High Court and one of her sons. In addition, the

prosecution called the investigating officers and the Consultant Judicial

Medical Officer who had examined the prosecutrix at the Monaragala

Hospital after 2 days from the date of incident.

At the close of the prosecution case, the trial Court decided that the

Appellant had a case to answer and called for his defence. The Appellant

made a dock statement denying any involvement with the incident and

claimed an alibi stating that he was at his home with his wife and their

children who are twins.

2

;

i, ! ! I 1

I i t I I t I I i i I i I I

The trial Court, with the delivery of the impugned judgment found

the Appellant guilty on both counts and imposed, a sentence of

imprisonment of 7 years on each count to run concurrently. He was;

imposed a fine of Rs. 5000.00 in respect of the first count and was further

ordered to pay Rs. 10,000.00 as compensation to the prosecutrix in respect

of the 2nd count with a default term of six months.

Being aggrieved by the said conviction and sentence, the Appellant

seeks to challenge its validity on the following grounds of appeal:-

a. the trial Court has erroneously concluded that the evidence in

relation to the identity of the Appella~t i.s .~ufficient to convict

him,

b. the trial Court has failed to consider the dock statement of the

Appellant

c. the trial Court has failed to consider that the prosecution has

failed to call a vital witness.

In order to properly appreciate these grounds of appeal, it is

necessary to refer to the case presented by the prosecution albeit

summarily.

The prosecutrix was living alone in her mud hut with a tiled roof

while one of her sons PW2, lived across the road in his house. On the day

of the incident, she had her dinner before dusk and had gone to sleep. She

heard a noise from the direction of her son's house. Then she heard

someone calling her son out by his name "U.B.". She told that person, U.B.

is not there and she would not open the door even to her child after dark.

Then the intruder had kicked open her door and entered her house. As he

3

1 I \

entered, the intruder blew out the bottle lamp and turned the table upside

down several times.

The prosecutrix had then called out her son, and the intruder had

gagged her by pressing a towel into her mouth. He told her thafhe came to

commit rape and not to call out others. She pleaded with him not to kill

her. The intruder had then removed her cloths and committed rape on her.

She pointed out her groin area as the area of her body where the intruder

had molested. She then told Court that the person who is married to her

granddaughter was that intruder and he had sexually molested her that

night. She later identified the Appellant in Court by walking up to the

dock as her eye sight was poor.

She further stated in evidence that the Appellant started vomiting

after the act. She used that window of opportunity to crawl through the

door on to the veranda of her house. Her son had then walked in at that

point of time. He saw the Appellant and asked her whether she identified

him. When she said she did not, she was told that it was" Nandana" her

granddaughter's husband.

In his evidence, the Consultant JMO stated to Court that during the

medical examination of the prosecutrix, he noted 10 external injuries and a

fracture of a bone. The expert witness expressed his opinion that there was

medical evidence of recent vaginal penetration based on his observations

of her genitalia.

The Appellant was arrested by the Police from his house on the

01.06.2014 at 8.10 p.m.

4

I

I 1 l

.l J ! l I ,

I i I I l ! I ! I j , I i

i t I

1 I

At the hearing of the appeat learned President's Counsel for the

Appellant submitted that the prosecutrix had failed to mention the name

of the Appellant in her statement to Police and also to the medical officer

in the short history. He also referred to the evidence that she did not

identify the intruder at the time of the commission of the sexual act and

also in Court. In relation to the name of the intruder, PW2 "U.B." who

rushed to the Proecutrix's house identified him as "Nandana" whereas

according to learned President's Counsel, the Appellant is "Chandana".

Therefore, he contended that the evidence led by the prosecution had

failed to establish the identity of the Appellant beyond a reasonable doubt

. and-therefore the trial Court was in error when it decided to convict him

on that evidence.

Learned Senior State Counsel for the Respondent, in her reply

referred to the places in the evidence of the Prosecutrix where she clearly

referred to identity of the Appellant. She also drew our attention to the

answer of the prosecutrix when she was asked the question whether she

identified as to who the intruder was. The prosecutrix had repeatedly

answered that she did identify him.

The complaint about the Appellant's name should be addressed

first. As per the indictment, the Appellant's name is Herath Mudiyanselage

Thushara Nandana and not Chandana as claimed by the Appellant in his

petition of appeal. No such issue was raised at the trial. The prosecutrix

was clear in her evidence that the Appellant was identified by her son as

"Nandana" who is also her granddaughter's husband.

5

The prosecutrix has used a particular dialect in describing the

incident. Considering her age, the generation she belonged to and the

mannerisms of the isolated rural community in which she lived her life,

her use of unusual and peculiar words and the context in which she uses

them had to be given due weightage by the trial Court. One such glaring

example of the peculiar manner of her expression could be found in page

43 where following question and answer could be found.

1/ g: e; c>a~ O)(J@J q@) cs)~.!D)G:lo)o))~?

G : ~C)~. II

It is clear that, ahhough her answer seemed in the negative, infact it

is a positive answer confirming identity. A similar expression that could be

found in the term "~qC)" or " .!Dlo).!D@" used certain other parts of the

country. When one takes that particular word only it apparently reflects a

negative answer in the typed script. But it is apparently common

expression used by members of public which could be equated to the

phrase in English "Why not?"

The trial Court had sufficiently dealt with this aspect in its judgment

when considering the credibility of this item of evidence.

Learned President's Counsel for the Appellant highlighted in his

submission that the Prosecutrix has failed to mention the name of the

Appellant either to the Police or to the Consultant JMO who interviewed

her soon after the incident. It was his contention, if there was proper

identification of the Appellant then it is reasonable to expect that she

mentions his name when the opportunity presented to do so.

6

This is a valid complaint on behalf of the Appellant which is in

support of his ground of appeal on identity. However, the evidence

revealed another aspect. Prosecution witness No.7, Ukku Banda (known as

D.B. to villagers) in his evidence stated that he learnt about this incident

through the principal of the village school. He had then visited the

prosecutrix on the 1st of June 2014 in the evening. When he enquired from

the prosecutrix, she implicated the Appellant referring to his as "Nandana"

who is married to "Doni" as the person who had molested her. It was this

witness who provided first information to the Police over this incident.

The witness further testified to the effect that the Prosecutrix had referred

to the Appllant as he is the person who is married to her granddaughter.

This obviously is the first opportunity for the prosecutrix to

implicate the name of the Appellant after the initial identification that was

done soon after the incident. As already noted, it is evident from the

manner in which the prosecutrix had answered the questions put to her by

Counsel that one would experience difficulty in following a sequence in

her narration of events. This is to be expected of a woman whose language

skills and the ability of expressing her experience through words are

obviously not the best, considering her underprivileged social back

ground.

However, what is important here to note is the fact that she did

implicate the Appellant when her son visited her on the following evening.

There is no allegation or even a hint of fabrication. Therefore, it is safe to

determine that the allegation made against the Appellant has consistently

been made by the prosecu

7

trix. The police officer who recorded her statement may not have probed

sufficiently enough to elicit this important information from the

prosecutrix. The Consultant JMO is not expected to record a detailed

"statement" off the prosecutrix, and as such the failure to n;ention the

name of the Appellant could sufficiently be understood. Accordingly, we

agree with the determination of the trial Court that this issue could not

affect the credibility of the prosecution's case.

It is evident from the judgment of the trial Court that it was mindful

of the challenge mounted by the Appellant as to the evidence of identity in

connecting him to the alleged act of rape. It had clearly referred to the

question of identity and," having considered the evidence presented by the

prosecution, concluded that there was clear and reliable evidence as to the

identity of the Appellant. The trial Court then concluded that the

prosecution has proved the identity of the Appellant beyond a reasonable

doubt.

When the evidence presented by the prosecution is considered in its

entirety, the conclusion reached by the trial Court on the question of

identity of the Appellant, could well be justified.

Learned President's Counsel also addressed this Court on the issue

that the trial Court had failed to properly consider the dock statement

made by the Appellant.

Upon perusal of the judgment of the trial Court it is revealed that

the dock statement made by the Appellant had been reproduced in the

judgment in verbatim. Thereafter, it had considered the contents of the

dock statement and concluded that it should be rejected. It is noted that the

8

1

i I I i

~ I I 1 I I I

~

~ i I j

Appellant claimed that he was with his family that evening. In effect, he

claimed an alibi. However, the prosecutrix in her evidence clearly stated

that the Appellant's wife had already gone back to her house taking their

children with her when this incident took place. There was n9 challenge

mounted by the Appellant over this assertion of fact during his cross

examination of the prosecutrix. No suggestion was put to her that he was

elsewhere. It would have been better if the trial Court was more

descriptive enough in describing its reasons for rejecting the dock

statement of the Appellant. In view of the above unchallenged factual

assertion by the prosecutrix, we are of the view that the trial Court had

correctly rejected the alibi taken up by the Appellant in his_ clock s.t~tement

which is clearly an afterthought.

It is our considered opinion that the appeal of the Appellant is

devoid of merit. We affirm the conviction and sentence imposed by the

trial Court on the Appellant.

The appeal of the Appellant is accordingly dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

DEEP ALI WIJESUNDERA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

9