IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

Court of Appeal Case No. CA HCC 0140114

High Court Gampaha Case

No. 4912003

BEFORE

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under and in terms of Section 331 (I) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979

Hon. Attorney General Attorney General's Department Colombo 12

Complainant

v.

I. Dewapaksha Pedige Salin Mayura Dewapaksha

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

I. Dewapaksha Pedige Salin Mayura Dewapaksha

Accused - Appellant

v.

2. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Complainant - Respondent

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J

K. PRIY ANTRA FERNANDO, J

, , ,.

COUNSEL:

ARGUED ON

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

FILED ON

JUDGMENT ON

K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J.

Anil Silva PC with Dileep Bhanu for the Accused - Appellant.

Haripriya Jayasundara SDSG for the Respondent

03.09.2020

25.09.2017 by the Accused - Appellant

29.09.2017 by the Complainant - Respondent

16.10.2020

I. The accused-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the appellant) was indicted in the

High Court of Gampaha on two counts, for committing murder of Neegal Pedige

Ranathunga, punishable under section 296 of the Penal Code, and for causing hurt

on Neegal Pedige Cyril Jayawardene, punishable in terms of section 315 of the

Penal Code. After trial, the appellant was convicted on count No.1 and was

sentenced to death. He was acquitted on count No.2.

2. Being aggrieved by the said conviction for murder and the consequential death

sentence, the appellant preferred the instant appeal. The Learned President's

Counsel appearing for the appellant, at the argument stage, urged the following

grounds of appeal;

2

' I .'

I. The non-calling of certain eye witnesses by the prosecution has an impact

on fair trial procedures guaranteed by the constitution

2. The learned High Court Judge did not consider the defence position

adequately,

3. The prosecution has not proved the case beyond reasonable doubt.

Facts in brief

3. The prosecution had called one eye witness to the incident. This was Keegal

Pedige Cyril Jayawardena (PWl) who was the alleged victim in count No.2.

According to his testimony, the appellant, the deceased and the witness had been

neighbours living in the same village. On the fateful day villagers had been

involved in preparing the place for a Dan Seta to be held for Poson Full Moon

Poya at the premises of a rice mill at about 10.30 pm. It had been two days before

the Poson Full Moon Poya day. The appellant came and assaulted the deceased

with a sword. PWI was also injured the course of the struggle when he tried to

prevent the attack on the deceased by the appellant. He then ran away. It was

evident that both the appellant and the deceased were cousins of PW I.

4. The position taken by the appellant at the trial had been that he was not involved in

the attack. He had been at home. The appellant testi fied that he ran away when the

police came to arrest him the same night due to fear of arrest, but he surrendered

the following day. It was also evident that there had been a case pending against

the deceased for using criminal force on the appellant's mother with intent to

outrage her modesty.

5. Learned President's Counsel for the appellant argued that PWI is the sole eye

witness called by the prosecution and therefore, the learned High Court Judge

should have considered his evidence with more care. Further it was submitted that

PWI was an interested witness.

3

6. The learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General appearing for the respondent

submitted that PWI is not an interested witness, but a cousin of both the appellant

as well as the deceased. Learned DSG further submitted that the mother of the

appellant had corroborated the evidence of PW I and that the appellant's motive to

attack the deceased was established by the appellant and the mother of the

appellant in their evidence.

7. The learned High Court Judge in her judgment has given careful consideration to

the evidence of the sole eye witness PWI. As the learned High Court Judge has

rightly mentioned in her judgment, Section 134 of the Evidence Ordinance

provides that no particular number of witnesses shall in any case be required for

the proof of any fact.

8. In the case of Wijepala V. Attorney General SC Appeal No. 104/99, SC ISpl/La

238199, the Court observed;

"Senaratne who was the sale eye witness has thus been cross- examined

on vital aspects relating to the incident and doubts have been raised in

regard to his presence at the scene. Section 134 of the Evidence

Ordinance lays down a specific rule that no particular number of

witnesses shall in any case be required for the proof of any fact, thus

attaching more importance to the quality of evidence rather than the

quantity. The evidence of a single witness, if cogent and impressive, can

be acted upon by a Court, but, whenever there are circumstances of

suspicion in the testimony of such a witness or is challenged by cross-

examination or otherwise, then corroboration may be necessary"

9. In the case of Sumanasena V. Attorney General [1999/ 3 Sri LR 137, it was held

that evidence must not be counted but weighed and the evidence of a single

witness if cogent and impressive could be acted upon by a court of law.

4

10. Hence, a conviction may be based on the sole testimony of a single witness, if

believed and if the testimony is found to be credible and trustworthy.

II. In the instant case the learned High Court judge in her judgment carefully analyzed

the evidence of the eye witness PWI and found it to be credible and capable of

being acted upon. The contradiction marked in his evidence and the omissions

brought to the notice of the Court would not go to the root of the matter and would

not affect the credibility of PW I. The trial Judge had also given careful

consideration of the evidence adduced by the defence and had rightly rejected the

same giving sufficient reasons.

12. It is the Trial Judge who has the opportunity to see the demeanor and deportment

to assess the credibility of a witness. In the case of Fradd V. Brown & company

Ltd. (20 N.L.R. Page 282) the Privy Council held:

"It is rare that a decision of a judge so express, so explicit, upon a point

of fact purely, is over-ruled by a Court of Appeal, because Courts of

Appeal recognize the priceless advantage which ajudge offirst instance

has in matters of that kind, as contrasted with any Judge of a Court of

Appeal, who can only learn from paper or from narrative of those who

were present. It is very rare that, in question of veracity, so direct and

so specific as these, a Court of Appeal will over-rule a Judge of first

instance"

13. Upon careful consideration of the evidence ofPWI with the medical evidence and

also the evidence adduced by the defence, this Court has no reason to interfere

with the decision of the learned High Court Judge to act upon the evidence of

PW I. PW I has testified as to how the appellant cut the deceased with a sword

several times even after the deceased fell on the ground. The medical officer who

conducted the autopsy on the body of the deceased has observed 14 injuries

including 12 cut injuries.

5

14. The learned President's Counsel for the appellant also submitted that PWI falls

into the category of an interested witness. It was the contention of the learned DSG

for the respondent that PW I cannot be considered as an interested witness.

15. In the case of Karthik Malllar V. State of Billar{1996} 1 see 614 (620), it was

held that a close relative who is a natural witness cannot be regarded as an

interested witness. The term interested postulates that the witness must have some

direct interest in having the accused somehow or the other convicted for some

animus or for some other reason. The same view was expressed in case of State of

Andhra Pradesll V. S. Rayappa, {2006} 4 Sec.

16. A similar view was taken by the Supreme Court of India in Ram Bharosey V.

State of V.P. AIR {1954} se 704, where the Court stated that a close relative of

the deceased does not, per se, become an interested witness. An interested witness

is one who is interested in securing a conviction of a person out of vengeance or

enmity or due to disputes and deposes before the Court only with that intention and

not to further the cause of justice.

17. The Supreme Court of India in the case of Raju Alias Balachandran V. State of

Tamil Nadu (2012) 12 see 701 held that;

" For the time being, we are concerned with four categories of

witnesses a third party disinterested and unrelated witness (such as a

bystander or passer-by); a third party interested witness (such as a trap

witness); a related and therefore an interested witness (such as the wife

of the victim) having an interest in seeing that the accused is punished;

a related and therefore an interested witness (such as the wife or

brother of the victim) having an interest in seeing the accused punished

and also having some enmity with the accused. But, more than the

categorization of a witness, the issue really is one of appreciation of the

6

"

evidence of a witness. A court should examine the evidence of a related

and interested witness having an interest in seeing the accused punished

and also having some enmity with the accused with greater care and

caution than the evidence of a third party disinterested and unrelated

witness. This is all that is expected and required. "

18. The Supreme Court of Sri Lanka in the case of The Attorney General V.

Sandanam Pitchi Mary Theresa {2011/ 2 SLR 298 held;

"A key test of credibility is whether the witness is an interested or

disinterested witness. Rajaratnam J. in Tudor Perera v. AG (SC 23175

D.C. Colombo Bribery 1901B -Minutes of s.c. Dated 111111975)

observed that when considering the evidence of an interested witness

who may desire to conceal the truth, such evidence must be scrutinized

with some care. The independent witness will normally be preferred to

an interested witness in case of conflict. Matters of motive, prejudice,

partiality, accuracy, incentive, and reliability have all to be weighed

(Vide, Halsbury Laws of England 4th Edition para 29). Therefore, the

relative weight attached to the evidence of an interested witness who is

a near relative of the accused or whose interests are closely identified

with one party may not prevail over the testimony of an independent

witness (Vide, Hasker v. Summers (1884) 10 V.L.R. (Eq.) 204 -

Australia; Leefunteum v. Beaudoin (1897)28 S.C.R. 89) - Canada)."

19. However, in the instant case, it was evident that PWI had no enmity with the

appellant, nor had he a special reason to lie in court against the appellant. Both the

appellant as well as the deceased are his cousins. As testified by PW I, he received

injuries, when he tried to prevent the appellant attacking the deceased with the

sword. PWI did not even say that the appellant deliberately caused injuries to him.

Considering that evidence, the learned Trial Judge found the appellant not guilty of

count No.2, where it was alleged that the appellant caused injuries to PWI by

7

"

hitting him with a sword. In the above premise, the learned High Court Judge has

rightly found PW 1 to be credible and his testimony could be acted upon.

20. The learned President's Counsel submitted that the failure by the prosecution to

call other eye witnesses, who were there at the crime scene, has an impact on the

fair trial procedures guaranteed by the constitution.

21. In the case of R. V. Russel Jones {1995J 1 Cr. App. R. 538, the Court observed

that the prosecution enjoys a discretion whether to call, or tender, any witness they

require to attend, but the discretion is not unfettered. The discretion must be

exercised in the interest of justice. The prosecutor must direct his mind to his

overall duty of fairness.

22. The Courts in England have also held that, in the event the prosecution is reluctant

to call a particular witness, the defence may call him if they so wish. (R. V.

Thompson (1876) 13 COX 181, R. V. Oliva49 Cr. App. R 298)

23. This principle was also adopted in Sri Lanka in several cases by this Court. In the

case of Sinnathamby Ganeshan and Another V. Republic of Sri Lanka CA.

Appeal No. 57-58/2003 the Court referred to what was held in case of Walimunige

John V. The State 76 N.L.R 488;

"The prosecution is not bound to call all the witnesses whose names

appear on the back of the indictment or to tender them for cross

examination. Further it is not incumbent on the trial judge to direct the

jury, save in exceptional circumstances, that they may draw a

presumption under section 114(j) of the Evidence Ordinance adverse to

the prosecution from its failure to call one or more of its witnesses at the

trial without calling all"

"The question of a presumption arises only where a witness whose

evidence is necessary to unfold the narrative that is withheld by the

8

..

prosecution and the failure to call such a witness constitutes a vital

missing link in the prosecution case and where a reasonable inference

to be drawn from the omission to call the witness is that he would, if

called, not have supported the prosecution. But where one witness's

evidence is cumulative of the other and would be mere repetition of the

narrative. "

24. The above principle In the case of Walimunige John was also followed in

Kumara de Silva V. A.G. [2010J 2 S.L.R. 169 and Ajith Fernando alias Konda

Ajith and others V. A.G. [2004[ 1 S.L.R. 288.

25. In the instant case there is no vital missing link in the case for the prosecution. The

statements of all listed witnesses had been disclosed to the defence with the

indictment. The defence had the opportunity to call them if they so wished and

also no application had been made to Court before the Trial Judge to call them by

Court. There had been no prejudice caused, nor was the appellant deprived of a fair

trial by the prosecution not calling all or some of the witnesses listed in the

indictment.

26. The learned President's Counsel also contended that the sole eye witness called by

the prosecution (PWl) had been a belated witness. It is evident that PWI after

running away from the crime scene had come back to the crime scene when he was

informed that the police had come. However, when he came, the police had left.

The incident had taken place at about 10.30 in the night. Therefore, he had made

his statement to the police the following day. In the circumstances, the delay in

making the statement till the following day would not affect his credibility.

27. The learned President's Counsel for the appellant submitted that the learned High

Court Judge has failed to consider the defence evidence. In her judgment from

pages 21 to 26 the learned Trial Judge has sufficiently discussed the evidence

adduced, the position taken by the defence and the reasons for rejecting the

9

,

defence. As submitted by the learned SDSG, the evidence adduced by the defence

h~d been more on the motive for the appellant to attack the deceased.

28. In the above premise, I tind the grounds of appeal urged by the appellant are

devoid of merit and should fail.

29. lienee, the appeal is dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

ACHALA WENGAPPULl, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

10