IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Case No: CA 108/2003

H.C. Kurunegala Case No: HC 100/2000

In the matter of an Appeal made in terms of Section 331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka .

Complainant

Vs.

1. Poruthotage Nalin Sujanaka

Perera 2. Lokubalasuriyage Lal

Premasiri

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Poruthotage Nalin Sujanaka Perera

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

The Attorney General Attorney-General's Department, Colombo 12. Complainant-Respondent

Page 1 of 12

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

WRJTTEN SUBMISSIONS

DECIDED ON

K.K. WICKREMASINGHE, J.

K. K. Wickremasinghe, J. K. Priyantha Fernando, J.

Tirantha Walaliyadde, PC with AAL R. Abeywardhana for the Accused-Appellant

Janaka Bandara, SSC for the Complainant-Respondent

22.07.2019

The Accused-Appellant - On 02.09.2019 The Complainant-Respondent- On

10.12.2015

27.11.2019

The Accused-Appellant has filed this appeal seeking to set aside the judgment

of the Learned High Court Judge of Kurunegala dated 12.11.2003 and

sentencing order dated 27.11.2003 in case No. HC 100/2000.

Facts of the case:

The Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the 'appellant') and another

were indicted in the High Court of Kurunegala under 12 charges, for using

criminal force on people named in the indictment, intending thereby to dishonor

them, an offence punishable under Section 346 read with Section 32 of the

Penal Code and for committing Robbery on those people using deadly weapon

with some others who were not known to the prosecution, an offence punishable

under section 383 read with section 32 of the Penal Code. Since the 2nd accused

passed away prior to the commencement of the trial, the indictment was

amended that the appellant committed the said offences with the 2nd accused

who was deceased and others not known to the prosecution.

Page 2 of 12

At the trial, four witnesses gave evidence for the prosecution, namely; .

PW 02 - Basnayaka Mudiyanselage Chandrawathi - A victim of the

criminal force

PW 01 - Justin Gallappaththi - a victim of the criminal force and robbery

PW OS - J.W. Upali - A victim of criminal force and robbery

PW 10 - Sargent K. Piyasena - The Chief Investigating Officer of the

incident from Katupotha Police Station.

The prosecution marked the Identification Parade notes through the Court

translator and closed its case. When the defence was called, three witnesses

testified for the defence case and the appellant gave evidence under oath.

At the conclusion of the trial, the Learned High Court Judge convicted the

appellant for charges under Section 346 of the Penal Code (Charge No. I, 2, S)

and acquitted him from the charges under Section 383 of the Penal Code

(Charge No.8, 9, 12). The rest of the charges were not pursued during the trial

and accordingly no judgment was delivered on them. The Learned High Court

Judge imposed a term of 02 years rigorous imprisonment for each charge and

ordered the sentence of Sth charge to run concurrently with ISl and 2nd charges.

Further, a fine ofRs.3000/= for each charge was imposed with a default term of

01 year rigorous imprisonment.

Being aggrieved by the said convictions and the sentences, dated 12.11.2003

and 27.11.2003, the appellant filed this appeal.

The Learned President's Counsel for the appellant submitted following grounds

of appeal;

1. The Legal issue of Divisibility of credibility

2. There is no independent corroboration

Page 3 of 12

As per the evidence of prosecution, the incident relevant to the instant case can

be summarized as follows;

On 19.01.1999, PW 01, 02 and 05 with several others were engaged in election

campaign for the North Western Provincial Council Elections and the appellant

came in a white color van with the 2nd accused (deceased) and some other

people who were not known to the prosecution and assaulted the victims with

iron pipes. The appellant was armed with several firearms. Thereafter, the

victims were forced to kneel down on the road and they were forcefully stripped

naked to their underwear. PW 01 was a then sitting' member of Southern

Provincial Council and PW 02 was a 50 years old woman. The appellant had

thereafter, robbed the money and jewelry of the victims and made them run on

the road for nearly Y, a mile. As per the evidence, the said gang of attackers

were led by the appellant and the 2nd accused who is now deceased. It was

further revealed that they attacked PW 0 I, 02 and 05 with iron pipes, stripped

them naked and robbed their jewelry while the others were present at the scene

with firearms.

The defence took up the position that the appellant was falsely implicated due to

political rivalry between the two parties. Defence witness Nishantha Kumara

testified that he witnessed the incident and the appellant was not among those

who came for the attack. One Janayalage Wijepala testified that the appellant

was with him at a different location at the time of the incident and the father of

the appellant testified that one 'Podi Gamini' committed the said offences and

his son did not commit said offences.

The Learned President's Counsel for the appellant contended that since the

appellant was acquitted from the robbery charges, evidence of the same

witnesses relating to the other charges cannot be believed and acted upon unless

there is independent corroboration. The Learned President's Counsel submitted

following case law to support his contention;

Page 4 of 12

1. The Queen V. Vellasamy and 04 others [63 NLR 265]

2. Siriwardena and another V. The Attorney General (1998) 2 Sri LR

222

3. Samaraweera V. The Attorney General (1990) 1 Sri LR 256

4. The Queen V. V.P. Julis and 02 others [65 NLR 505]

5. S.D. Francis Appuhamy and 03 others V. The Queen [68 NLR 437]

The Learned SSC for the complainant-respondent (hereinafter referred to as the

'respondent'), replied to the above contention that there is no such strict rule

that evidence of the same witnesses relating to the other charges cannot be

believed and acted upon unless there is independent corroboration but only a

requirement of compelling reasons. The Learned SSC further argued that the

first three cases submitted by the Learned President's Counsel for the appellant,

are not applicable and not relevant to the instant case since the circumstances of

those case are different from the instant case.

In the case of The Queen V. Vellasamy and 04 others [63 NLR 2651, it was

held that,

" Where the evidence of a witness is disbelieved in respect of one offence

it cannot be accepted to convict the accused of any other offence.

Accordingly, if a witness's evidence is disbelieved in respect of a charge

of murder it cannot sustain the conviction of the accused in respect of a

charge under sectioy) 198 of the Penal Code. "

The said Vellasamy case was based completely on the testimony of a single

witness named Maniccam who had seen the accused was carrying the lifeless

body of the deceased prior to recovering the dead body from a nearby canal.

Upon perusal of the said judgment, it is clear that the said case was a case of

where the jury believed and disbelieved the same witness, at the same time.

Page 5 of 12

Therefore, I am of the view that it was not a case involving the principal of . divisibility of credibility which could be applied to the instant case.

Both cases of Siriwardena and another V. The Attorney General (1998) 2

Sri LR 222 and Samaraweera V. The Attorney General (1990) 1 Sri LR

256, had referred to the principle mentioned in the case of 'Mohamed Fiaz

Baksh V. The Queen [1958J AC 167 (PC)'. In the said case of Baksh, it was

held that,

"Their credibility cannot be treated as divisible and accepted against one

and rejected against the other. Their honesty having been shown to be

open to question, it cannot be right to accept their verdict against one

and reopen it in the case of the other ... "

However, in the case of The Queen V. V.P. Julis and 02 others [65 NLR

5051, it was held that,

"The maxim falsus in uno, falsus in omnibus, is not an absolute rule

which has to be applied without exception in every case where a witness

is shown to have given false evidence on a material point. But when such

evidence is given by a witness, the question whether other portions of his

evidence can be accepted as true should not be resolved in his favour

unless there is some compelling reason for doing so ... "

Further, in the case of S.D. Francis Appuhamy and 03 others V. the Queen

[68 NLR 437J, it was held that,

"The remarks contained In the judgment of the Privy Council in

Mohamed Fiaz Baltsh v. The Queen (J058) A.C. 167 that the credibility

of witnesses cannot be treated as divisible and accepted against one

accused and rejected against another (a) was inapplicable in the

circumstances of the present case and (b) cannot be the foundation for a

principal that the evidence of a witness must be accepted completely or

not at all ".

Page 6 of 12

Following the above said two cases of V.P. Juiis (supra) and Francis . Appuhamy (supra), Justice P.R.P. Perera in the case of Samaraweera (supra)

held that,

"The maximfalsus in uno,falsus in omnibus could not be applied in such

circumstances. Further all falsehood is not deliberate. Errors of memory,

faulty observation or lack of skill in observation upon any point or points,

exaggeration or mere embroidery or embellishment must be distinguished

from deliberate falsehood before applying the maxim. Nor does the

maxim apply to cases of testimony on the same point between different

witnesses. In any event this maxim is not an absolute rule which has to be

applied without exception in every case where a witness is shown to have

given false evidence on a material point. When such evidence is given by

a witness the question whether other portions of his evidence can be

accepted as true may not be resolved in his favour unless there is some

compelling reason for doing so. The credibility of witnesses can be

treated as divisible and accepted against one and rejected against

another. The jury or judge must decide for themselves whether that part

of the testimony which is found to be false taints the whole or whether the

false can safely be separatedfrom the true. "

Therefore, it is manifestly clear there is no concrete rule that a witness should

be disbelieved completely if he is disbelieved at one point. The practice of the

Court has been to act upon such evidence, if there are compelling reasons to do

so. Therefore, the Trial Judge should be cautious to consider whether the

witness is deliberately giving false evidence or whether the mistakes are

committed due to poor memory of the witness.

J observe that in the instant case, the issue is not the fact that a witness was

disbelieved at one point and believed at one point, but the fact that there were

Page 7 of 12

nor suflicient evidence to prove that it was in fact the appellant who committed . the robbery among all the perpetrators in the incident.

As I have already mentioned, the incident in the instant case consisted of two

main offences, namely, using criminal force and robbery. I observe that the

Learned High Court Judge proceeded to acquit the appellant from robbery

charges since the evidence of the prosecution did not prove beyond reasonable

doubt it was the appellant who robbed the victims.

The Learned SSC for the respondent contended that throughout the trial, the

defence admitted the occurrence of the incident and the defence never suggested

that any of the witnesses were not present in the scene or that they have not

been victimized.

I observe that as per the prosecution version, the witnesses lodged a complaint

with the Police, implicating the accused, as soon as they managed to find some

clothes, after the incident. It is highly unlikely that victims, who underwent such

public humiliation and disgrace, made a complaint to the Police Station

implicating some person who was not even at the scene and would let go of the

person who actually stripped them naked.

Further, PW 02 was a resident of the same area with the appellant, and she

clearly identified the appellant since she knew him even prior to the incident.

PW 0 I and 05 too identified the appellant in the Identification Parade even

though the appellant was n'ot a known character to them. It is noteworthy that

the Identification Parade Notes were admitted by the defence during the trial

under Section 420 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act and therefore, such

identification remains unchallenged.

The Learned High Court Judge was of the view that the evidence was not

consistent only with regard to the robbery incident. This does not any manner

suggest that the incident of dishonouring the victims did not take place. Since

Page 8 of 12

the indictment carried two lypes of charges, the Learned High Court Judge was . in a position to consider whether to convict the appellant for both charges or for

only one or to acquit him of all charges. Considering all these facts, the Learned

High Court Judge came to the conclusion that a group of people including the

appellant participated in the charges in the indictment, and the prosecution has

proved beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant committed an offence

punishable under section 346 even though the prosecution failed to prove the

robbery charge against the appellant.

The above conclusion was well within law and the Learned High Court Judge

was not prevented from believing the prosecution evidence with regard to the

dishonouring incident and being unsatisfied with the evidence on the fact that

whether the appellant himself committed the robbery.

Considering above, it is my view that the first ground of appeal of the appellant

should fail.

The Learned President's Counsel for the appellant contended that there was not

sufficient independent corroboration.

As r have already discussed under the first ground of appeal, there were

compelling reasons to believe the version of the prosecution.

Upon perusing the prosecution evidence, it is manifested that the evidence of

PW Oland PW 02 were consistent and they were in fact corroborating each

other on material facts. The evidence of PW 05 too was well consistent with the

prosecution version.

Even though the defence witnesses testified that the appellant was either with

them or it was one 'Podi Gamini' who committed the offence, all the witnesses

admitted that they did not reveal the said fact to any authority prior to giving

evidence in the High Court. The father of the appel/ant testified that he was an

eye witness where the said 'Podi Garnini' committed the offence. However, it is

noteworthy that father of the appellant never took any step to bring this matter

Page 9 of 12

to the attention of any law enforcement authority (Page 211 - 213 of the briet), . thereby his son could have been proved innocent very easily.

In such a backdrop, it is manifestly clear that there were compelling reasons to

believe the prosecution evidence with regard to the participation of the appellant

in the incident in question and therefore, the culpability of the appellant in the

instant incident was well proved.

In the case of The AG V. Potta Naufer and others (2007) 2 Sri L.R. 144, it

was observed that,

"When faced with contradictions in a witness's testimonial, the court

must bear in mind the nature and significance of the contradictions,

viwed in light of the whole of the evidence given by the witness. The court

must also corne to a determination regarding whether this contradiction

was an honest mistake on the part of the witness or whether it was a

deliberate attempt to mislead court ... "

In the case of Vadivelu Thevar V. State of Madras [1957 AIR 614], it was

held that,

"On a consideration of the relevant authorities and the provisions of

the Indian Evidence Act, the follOWing propositions may be safely stated

as firmly established:

(1) As a general ru'te, a court can and may act on the testimony of a

single witness though uncorroborated. One credible witness outweighs

the testimony of a number of other witnesses of indifferent character ...

(3) Whether corroboration of the testimony of a single witness is or is

not necessary, must depend upon facts and circumstances of each case

and no general rule can be laid down in a matter like this and much

Page 10 of 12

depends upon the judicial discretion of the Judge before whom the case

comes ... " (Emphasis added)

[t is trite law that an appellate court shall not disturb findings of a trial Judge

unless such finding is manifestly wrong. I observe that the Learned High Court

Judge has correctly evaluated all contradictions and concluded that none of

them affected the credibility of witnesses and the same did not go to root of the

case. Therefore, I see no merits in the above argument as well.

Considering above, 1 am of the view that there is no reason to interfere with the

findings of the Learned High Court Judge and therefore, 1 affirm the conviction

dated 12.11.2003 and sentence dated 27.11.2003.

Accordingly, the appeal is hereby dismissed.

K. Priyantha Fernando, J.

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Page 11 of 12

Cases referred to: . I. Samaraweera V. The Attorney General (1990) I Sri LR 256

2. Siriward.ena and another V. The Attorney Genera l (1998) 2 Sri LR 222

3. Mohamed Fiaz Baksh V. The Queen (1958) AC 167 (PC)

4. The Queen V. V.P. Ju lis and 02 others [65 NLR 505)

5. S.D. Francis Appuhamy and 03 others V. the Queen [68 NLR 437)

6. The AG V. Potta Naufer and others (2007) 2 Sri L.R. 144

7. Vadiyelu Theyar V. State of Madras [1957 AIR 614)

Page 12 of 12