==== BLOCKS ==== 

WRT/0366/24

Page 1 of 14

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Orders in

the nature of Writs of Certiorari, Prohibition

and Mandamus under and in terms of Article

140 of the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

S. A. V. Inoka Sanjeevanie,

No. 296/1, Sirinanda Jothikarama Mawatha,

Thalawathugoda.

PETITIONER

C.A. Case No. WRT/0366/24

Vs.

1. National Water Supply & Drainage Board,

Galle Road, Ratmalana.

2. W. C. A. Gunaratne,

Chief Engineer (P&C),

Greater Colombo Water Reclamation Division,

National Water Supply & Drainage Board,

No. 26/2, Attidiya Road, Ratmalana.

3. P. H. W. K. Samarawickrema,

The Officer-in-Charge,

OIC (Jayawadanagama) Office,

National Water Supply & Drainage Board,

Wickremasinghepura,

Battaramulla.

RESPONDENTS

WRT/0366/24

Page 2 of 14

BEFORE : K. M. G. H. KULATUNGA, J.

COUNSEL : Faisza Markar, PC, with Kaushalya Molligoda and Zainab

Markar instructed by Dilini Gamage for the Petitioner.

Sachitha Fernando, SC, for the Respondents.

ARGUED ON : 08.10.2025

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON : 21.10.2025

DECIDED ON : 27.10.2025

JUDGEMENT

K. M. G. H. KULATUNGA, J.

1. The petitioner has been engaging in business under the business name

and style of “Amaratunga Enterprises” with the 1st respondent Water

Board. The said business involved the engaging of gully bowsers in

transporting and discharging sewage and wastewater at a pumping

station of the 1st respondent. The petitioner had been informed by letter

P-11 that 10 gully bowsers so engaged will be suspended pending an

inquiry. The petitioner, by this application, is challenging the said

decision and seeking a writ of certiorari to quash the said suspension.

2. The petitioner is the owner of the business name registered under the

style of “Amaratunga Enterprises” (vide P-2). The petitioner admits that

K. K. Shantha, her husband, is employed by the 1st respondent Board

in the capacity of a driver, and the said Shantha has been in the

employment of the 1st respondent before the petitioner entered into the

business relationship with the 1st respondent Board. The petitioner, at

paragraph 12 of the petition, admits that the said Shantha is her

husband, so employed by the 1st respondent, and that an intimation to

her husband that his employment with the 1st respondent may

WRT/0366/24

Page 3 of 14

disqualify his wife from engaging in business with the 1st respondent.

In view of this, the petitioner admits that her husband has tendered his

resignation with effect from 21.02.2024. However, in view of a pending

audit, his resignation has not been accepted [vide P-9(b)]. The petitioner

at paragraph 13 admits that her husband did inform her on 17.05.2024

that he received a letter intimating of an investigation being conducted

by the Human Resources Department of the 1st respondent with regard

to the disposal of sewage by gully bowsers owned by Amaratunga

Enterprises to the Jayawadanagama pumping station.

3. Further, in view of the said inquiry her husband has been transferred

to the Dehiwala - Mount Lavinia office of the 1st respondent. Thereafter,

her husband has received letter P-11 dated 21.05.2024 informing him

of the temporary suspension of the services of 10 gully bowsers referred

to in the said letter until the conclusion of the said

inquiry/investigation. The said letter also informed that the said

temporary suspension was operative from 27.05.2024. The petitioner

submits that her husband has, by letter dated 25.05.2024, informed

the 1st respondent that he has no connection to the business activities

of Amaratunga Enterprises.

4. The petitioner’s primary argument is that the suspension of the

engagement of the gully bowsers referred to in P-11 has been made

without any prior intimation or affording a fair hearing to Amaratunga

Enterprises and that the said decision to so suspend is in violation of

rules of natural justice, unreasonable and in breach of the legitimate

expectation of the petitioner and is illegal and ultra vires.

5. The substantial issue for determination is the legality and propriety of

the decision to suspend the engagement of the 10 gully bowsers as

made by P-11. The petitioner claims that these 10 gully bowsers were

engaged by Amaratunga Enterprises to the 1st respondent. As such, any

suspension without due intimation to the said Amaratunga Enterprises

WRT/0366/24

Page 4 of 14

is illegal and unlawful. P-11 is a temporary suspension pending an

inquiry or an investigation. It is alleged that K. Shantha is engaged in

business with the 1st respondent through Amaratunga Enterprises,

which is owned by him or his family. The petitioner admits that her

husband informed her of P-11. This letter had also been copied to

Amaratunga Enterprises.

6. The petitioner’s main position is that the suspension of the services of

the gully bowsers without prior intimation to Amaratunga Enterprises

and the petitioner is a clear violation of the right to be heard, and to

that extent, the said decision is arbitrary and illegal. On a close perusal

of P-11, it is apparent that the suspension was the engagement of the

10 gully bowsers referred to in P-11. This is addressed to K. K. Shantha,

and the sum total and the basis of the said temporary suspension is

that the said K. K. Shantha is engaged in business with the 1st

respondent board under the name and style or through the business

entity of Amaratunga Enterprises. In view of which, the suspension of

the engagement of 10 bowsers is what has been intimated.

7. The petitioner attempts to assert that her husband, K. K. Shantha, has

no connection or involvement in engaging these 10 gully bowsers to the

1st respondent. The bare minimum, and the starting point to establish

an absence of any direct link in the context of this allegation, is to

establish that K. K. Shantha is not the owner of these gully bowsers. To

this end, the registration certificates of the said vehicles ought to have

been produced. The petitioner has merely produced a document

confirming the finance lease facility in respect of two of the said gully

bowsers [P-4(a), P-4(b)]. The obligation to tender the documents of

ownership of the said gully bowsers to exclude the alleged connection

of K. K. Shantha was upon the petitioner. This vital piece of information

had not been made available. Further, providing the information in

respect of two gully bowsers and not others leads to the necessary

inference that the details of the other gully bowsers have been

WRT/0366/24

Page 5 of 14

deliberately withheld, which amounts to a suppression of a relevant

fact. This is more so, as P-11 proceeds on the premise and intimates

that K. K. Shantha has in fact engaged in business with the 1st

respondent through Amaratunga Enterprises. In this context, the

aforesaid failure amounts to a serious suppression of a material fact.

8. The next relevant issue is the reason for K. K. Shantha to immediately

make an attempt to tender his resignation from the employment of the

1st respondent by P-9(a) dated 21.02.2024. The attempt to tender his

resignation and so resign has not succeeded, as it had not been

accepted by the 1st respondent in view of an internal audit and

investigation that was pending.

9. In the normal course of events, if K. K. Shantha had no connection

whatsoever to the business activities of Amaratunga Enterprises, one

would not expect the husband of the petitioner to resign from his

employment in this manner. The letter of resignation had preceded P-

11 by several months. According to the petitioner, her husband

attempted to so resign, as he feared his continued employment with the

1st respondent would create issues and/or prejudice for the

continuation of the said business activities of Amaratunga Enterprises

with the 1st respondent. It is also admitted at paragraph 12(d) of the

petition that her husband has received information unofficially of a

complaint had been received, to the effect that he, being an employee of

the 1st respondent, disqualifies the petitioner as his wife (the petitioner)

from engaging and carrying on business with the 1st respondent. These

are the reasons advanced by the petitioner to explain her husband’s

sudden decision to tender the letter of resignation. This averment

considered in conjunction with the contents of P-11 leads to a

reasonable inference as to the actual reason for the decision to so act.

That is, the petitioner’s husband was in fact involved, to some degree,

with the business enterprise as alleged by P-11. This is further

WRT/0366/24

Page 6 of 14

buttressed and compounded by the fact of the petitioner not disclosing

the ownership of the 10 gully bowsers.

10. Unfortunately, the respondents have failed to file objections, and the

documents tendered by the respondent along with a motion were also

objected to by the petitioner. As such, this court is only left with the

petitioner’s version and the documents annexed thereto to ascertain the

relevant factual position. A petitioner is required to make a full and

complete disclosure of all relevant facts. The failure to so disclose or

attempt to conceal some material information will disentitle such

petitioner from obtaining relief by way of writ. It is established law that

discretionary relief will be refused by Court without going into and

considering the merits if there has been any suppression and/or

misrepresentation of material facts.

11. It is relevant, in this context, to refer to the following passage from the

judgment of Pathirana, J., in W. S. Alphonso Appuhamy vs.

Hettiarachchi (77 NLR 131) at pages 135-136, held as follows:

“The necessity of a full and fair disclosure of all the material facts to be placed before the Court when, an application for a writ or injunction, is made and the process of the Court is invoked is laid down in the case of the King v. The General Commissioner for the Purpose of the Income Tax Acts for the District of Kensington — Ex-parte Princess Edmond de Poignac — (1917). Although this case deals with a writ of prohibition the principles enunciated are applicable to all cases of writs or injunctions. In this case a Divisional Court without dealing with the merits of the case discharged the rule on the ground that the applicant had suppressed or misrepresented the facts material to her application. The Court of Appeal affirmed the decision of the Divisional Court that there had been a suppression of material facts by the applicant in her affidavit and therefore it was justified in refusing a writ of prohibition without going into the merits of the case. In other words, so rigorous is the necessity for a full and truthful disclosure of all material facts that the Court would not go into the merits of the application, but will dismiss it without further examination.”

WRT/0366/24

Page 7 of 14

The above dicta, inter alia, was cited with approval by Janak De Silva,

J., in Wickramasinghe Arachchilage Bhathiya Indika

Wickramasinghe vs. Land Commissioner General, Case No. CA

(Writ) 381/2017, decided on 12.05.2020, and has been followed in a

number of prior decisions; namely, Dahanayake and Others vs. Sri

Lanka Insurance Corporation Ltd. and Others [(2005) 1 Sri.L.R. 67];

Hulangamuwa vs. Siriwardena [(1986) 1 Sri.L.R. 275]; Collettes Ltd.

vs. Commissioner of Labour [(1989) 2 Sri.L.R. 6]; Laub vs. Attorney

General [(1995) 2 Sri.L.R. 88]; Blanca Diamonds (Pvt) Ltd. vs.

Wilfred Van Els [(1997) 1 Sri.L.R. 360]; Jayasinghe vs. The National

Institute of Fisheries [(2002) 1 Sri.L.R. 277]; and Lt. Commander

Ruwan Pathirana vs. Commodore Dharmasiriwardene & Others

[(2007) 1 Sri.L.R. 24].

Reiterating this position, Saleem Marsoof, PC, J., in Namunukula

Plantations Limited vs. Minister of Lands and others (2012) 1 SLR

376, held that,

“If any party invoking the discretionary jurisdiction of a court of law is found wanting in the discharge of its duty to disclose all material facts, or is shown to have attempted to pollute the pure stream of justice, the court not only has the right but a duty to deny relief to such person.” [emphasis added]. 12. When a petitioner makes an application for a writ to invoke this Court’s

discretionary jurisdiction, such petitioner enters into an understanding

or an agreement with the Court which requires the petitioner to act with

uberrima fides. Therefore, such petitioner is required to place before

Court all relevant facts material to the issue at hand. The failure to place

such material fact/s, as well as misrepresentation of facts, will both

result in the denial of the relief so sought by such petitioner. The issue

of suppression or misrepresentation of fact and the lack of uberrima

fides thus will be an issue primarily between the Court and the petitioner

WRT/0366/24

Page 8 of 14

as opposed to it being between the parties. Pathirana, J., in the decision

of Alphonso Appuhamy vs. Hettiarachchi (supra), cited the following:

“Scrutton L. J., … cited the words of Wigram V. C. in the case of

Castelli v. Cook — (1849) 7 Hare, 89, 94: —

“A plaintiff applying ex-parte comes (as it has been

expressed) under a contract with the Court that he will state

the whole case fully and fairly to the Court. If he fails to do

that, and the Court finds, when the other party applies to

dissolve the injunction, that any material fact had been

suppressed or not properly brought forward, the plaintiff is

told that the Court will not decide on the merits, and that, as

he has broken faith with the Court, the injunction must go.”

13. Accordingly, on a perusal and consideration of the petition by itself, if

there be material which suffices to satisfy this Court of such conduct

that amounts to suppression or misrepresentation or, for that matter, a

serious lack of uberrima fides, this Court is entitled to consider such

matter ex mero motu or on its own volition, even without the opposing

party raising such concern, issue, or objection, so to say. The writ

jurisdiction which the petitioner intends to invoke is a discretionary

remedy. If there be a serious lack of uberrima fides, non-disclosure, or

misrepresentation, that per se will result in the refusal and dismissal of

such application. A petitioner is not, as of right, entitled to relief in the

exercise of this Court’s discretionary writ jurisdiction. So much so, that

even at the Support stage, in the absence of the opposing party, if it is

apparent and it clearly appears that there is misrepresentation,

suppression, or lack of uberrima fides, then this Court on its own volition

is entitled to refuse and reject such application on that score alone.

14. In this application, the petitioner is seeking to quash P-11, which is

addressed to the husband of the petitioner. The petitioner has made

several averments in the petition, at paragraph 12 (a) – (h), with reference

to her husband, K. K. Shantha. The receipt of P-11 was by the husband

WRT/0366/24

Page 9 of 14

of the petitioner; the reasons for the suspension of the engagement of

certain gully bowsers is referred to therein, with specific reference to K.

K. Shantha, who was either directly or through a family member

engaging in business under the name and style “Amaratunga

Enterprises”, and also to the pending inquiry. It is significant and

relevant to note that the permission granted by P-5 has not been

suspended. What had been specifically suspended is the engagement of

10 gully bowsers referred to in P-11. On the face of it, it appears that the

suspension is due to some form of link between the said gully bowsers

and K. K. Shantha, the husband of the petitioner.

15. The petitioner, in challenging P-11, is thus required to place before this

Court and satisfy as to the ownership of the 10 gully bowsers referred to

in P-11. The basic document by which this information could and should

have been placed before this Court is by producing the certificates of

registration of the said gully bowsers. The petitioner has not provided

this material. This becomes further relevant and critical, as the

petitioner specifically avers in paragraph 10 of the said petition that the

said fleet of vehicles “are owned and maintained by the petitioner.” The

singularly relevant document to confirm this averment in relation to P-

11 is none other than the certificate of registration as aforesaid. During

the course of the arguments and in the written submissions of the

petitioner, it was contended that the letter P-11 stipulates that the said

gully bowsers have been tendered for registration to the Regional Office

of the Water Board, under the name and style of “Amaratunga

Enterprises”. This fact does not establish the ownership. It merely

provides that these gully bowsers have been so registered for the

purposes of discharging sewage and wastewater with the 1st respondent,

under the name and style of “Amaratunga Enterprises”. As this does not

establish the ownership, to that extent, there is a suppression of a

relevant and material fact.

16. The respondents in this instance may not have filed their objections,

but by way of a motion dated 24.06.2025, three documents were

WRT/0366/24

Page 10 of 14

tendered, marked ‘A’, ‘B’, and ‘C’. Document ‘C’ is an audit query calling

for information and clarification by the National Audit Office. ‘A’ and ‘B’

are certain Circulars of the 1st respondent. The learned President’s

Counsel, Ms. Faisza Markar, for the petitioner vehemently objected to

the consideration of these documents on the basis that they have not

been properly tendered to this Court. These documents no doubt, were

tendered to this Court by way of a motion, and there is no supporting

affidavit. However, of the said documents, document ‘C’ is of relevance

and importance. The starting point is that the petitioner by prayer (e)

seeks to quash, in the abstract form, certain reports, which undoubtedly

is also a reference to the report marked ‘C’. P-11 also makes reference

to a pending investigation and also the audit query. In these

circumstances, the audit query marked ‘C’ amounts to a necessary

document vis-à-vis the petitioner's application when considered in its

totality. The petitioner has also by prayer (b) sought for the calling of and

the examination of the file pertaining to the purported decision as

communicated by P-11. Correspondingly, by prayer (e), the petitioner is

also seeking the quashing of any report of any other governmental

department or body or other functionary containing any adverse finding.

This, inter alia, is an apparent reference to the audit query marked ‘C’.

In that context, the respondents have now placed before this Court the

said material and documents by way of a motion, with notice to the

petitioner.

17. The petitioner has, by paragraph 27 of the petition, reserved the right

to tender any additional documents. It is thus incumbent upon the

petitioner, upon receipt of the same, to so tender this as an additional

document. The petitioner having failed and not done so is now objecting

to the consideration of the said document ‘C’. As aforementioned, the

issue of suppression of a material fact, or to that matter even a

misrepresentation, is an issue between Court and such petitioner. In

consideration and determination of this primary issue, I find that this

Court is entitled to consider the specific document ‘C’ to which the

WRT/0366/24

Page 11 of 14

petitioner herself makes several references to in the petition. It is a true

copy, certified by an Attorney-at-Law. Thus, as opposed to it being

considered to decide the merits of the application between the parties, I

hold that such document can be taken cognisance of and considered to

determine the uberrima fides of the petitioner.

18. As concluded above, the registration certificates of the respective gully

bowsers are primarily relevant to this application. In this backdrop, I

observe that paragraph 5.1 of the audit query marked ‘C’ makes specific

reference to the employment and engagement of gully bowsers bearing

registration nos. WP LO-3672, WP LM-4679, 68-7245, and WP LL-1190

by the 1st respondent. It is then observed that the said vehicles are

registered in the name of a driver employed by the 1st respondent Board

and that the owner is the spouse of the person who had engaged the

same. The abovementioned vehicle registration numbers also appear on

P-11. This clearly leads to the necessary inference that K. K. Shantha,

the driver of the 1st respondent is the registered owner of these gully

bowsers. The said ownership is thus a very relevant fact that has been

suppressed by the petitioner.

19. Going beyond that, I also observe that the petitioner at paragraph 11 of

the petition makes a specific reference that a fleet of gully bowsers is

owned and maintained by the petitioner. Further thereto, the petitioner

tenders the letter marked P-12 alleged to have been written by the

petitioner’s husband, K. K. Shantha, stating that he has no connection

to, or with, the business activities of Amaratunga Enterprises. The sum

total of the aforesaid is to make out that the said vehicles referred to in

P-11 are owned by the petitioner and K. K. Shantha has nothing to do

with those vehicles. In light of the material in the document marked ‘C’

aforesaid, it is apparent and obvious. I am satisfied that this amounts

to and is a serious suppression and a misrepresentation of fact. In the

above circumstances, this Court, in the least, is lawfully entitled to

consider the contents of the document marked ‘C’ for the Court to

WRT/0366/24

Page 12 of 14

consider and determine the issues of suppression, misrepresentation or

the lack of uberrima fides, which is a matter between the petitioner and

this Court.

20. In L. G. J. De Silva and Another vs. Paranahencharige Siridiyas

and Others (SC Appeal No. 171/2010, decided on 14.03.2025), P. P.

Surasena, J. (as his Lordship then was), with Janak De Silva, J. and

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J. agreeing, considered the doctrine of ‘clean

hands’ and held as follows:

“A Petitioner filing a Writ Petition must come to Court with clean

hands. Our Courts have persistently held that the Courts must not

grant writs which are discretionary in nature, when there are

grounds to believe that such writs have been prayed for, with

ulterior motives.

The ‘clean hands’ doctrine is a maxim in equity which says that

the one who comes to Court should come with clean hands with no

fault of their own. In the case of K. G. D. Walter Abeysundara

vs. Dr. S. H. Munasinghe (CA/Writ/514/2021), the Court of

Appeal dismissed the Petitioner’s application as they have come to

Courts with ‘unclean hands’. The learned Judge of the Court of

Appeal in that case further held that:

“By perusing legal literature and the Superior Court

judgements, it emanates that, the doctrine of clean hands is

also an important limb of the principle of uberrimae fidei.”

In the case of Sella Kapu Lilani Abeychandra vs. Principal &

Other (SC/FR/52/2018), the Court held:

“the Petitioner has misrepresented the facts as to the

residence, and in violation of the ‘clean hands doctrine’ in

equity. This court is obliged to protect the integrity of the court

and simultaneously, bound to prevent the 'improper acts'

being committed in the matter of public policy.””

WRT/0366/24

Page 13 of 14

21. Accordingly, I am of the view that the aforesaid suppression of the

details of the ownership of the gully bowsers, considered in conjunction

with the conduct of the pre-emptive attempt to resign by K. K. Shantha,

clearly amounts to a deliberate suppression of a material fact. To my

mind, if this fact was so observed at the outset, this Court may not have

issued formal notice either. The impugned document P-11 is prima facie

no more than an interim measure pending an inquiry. On this basis too,

the petitioner is not entitled to have and maintain this application or the

relief as prayed for.

22. According to the petitioner, her husband’s sudden decision to resign

was in view of an intimation that if a family member is being employed

by the 1st respondent, it would be an impediment for the petitioner to

engage in business with the 1st respondent. The petitioner also avers

that her husband has received information of a complaint being made

that his employment with the 1st respondent would disqualify the

petitioner, to the effect that he, being an employee of the 1st respondent,

disqualified his wife from carrying on a business relationship with the

1st respondent [vide paragraph 13(d) of the petition]. It is also averred

that there is an audit/investigation against him, which was the apparent

reason for the refusal to accept the letter of resignation. This intimation

is made by letter P-9(b). According to letter P-11, there is also a reference

to an inquiry. The above clearly proves that the petitioner was aware of

the reasons to suspend the registration of the gully bowsers. It is the

connection between the gully bowser and K. K. Shantha. This, the 1st

respondent has been aware and privy to. That being so, the petitioner

knew and ought to have known the relevance and importance of the

ownership of the gully bowsers and the certificates of registration to this

application.

23. In the above circumstances, I hold that the petitioner is not entitled to

the relief sought by way of writ, as the petitioner is guilty of suppression

and misrepresentation of material facts, and there is a serious lack of

WRT/0366/24

Page 14 of 14

uberrima fides. Further thereto, there is no suspension or cancellation

of the permission granted to the petitioner/Amaratunga Enterprises by

P-5. It is only the suspension of the engagement of certain gully bowsers

for that purpose. Therefore, I hold that the petitioner is not entitled to

and cannot have and maintain this application.

24. Accordingly, this application is refused and dismissed, subject to costs

fixed at Rs. 75,000.00, of which Rs. 25,000.00 is to be paid to the 1st

respondent and Rs. 50,000.00 to be paid to the State as State costs in

view of the serious suppression, misrepresentation of material facts, and

the abuse of process, as I observed above.

Application dismissed subject to costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL