IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal

in terms of Section 331(1) of the

Code of Criminal Procedure Act

No. 15 of 1979 read with Article

138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka.

The Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal Case No.

CA/HCC/0066/2018 Complainant

High Court of Colombo

Case No. HC/6098/2012 Vs.

Liyanthanthrigamage Nalin

Chaminda.

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Liyanthanthrigamage Nalin

Chaminda.

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent

Page 2 of 15

BEFORE : MENAKA WIJESUNDERA, J

K.M.G.H. KULATUNGA, J

COUNSEL : Kaneel Maddumage with Praveen Premathilake and

Narthana Wevita for the Accused-Appellant.

Disna Warnakula, DSG for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 08.10.2024

DECIDED ON : 03.12.2024

K.M.G.H. KULATUNGA, J.

1) The appellant in this case was indicted on a charge of murder by

causing the death of one Mohotti Arachchilage

Sugathapala alleged to have been committed on the 13th of May

2008 at Grandpass Colombo. The trial court mainly on the basis

of the evidence held that the testimony of PW-1 Makolage

Seelawathie is credible and trustworthy with regard to the guilt

of the appellant and convicted the Appellant of the offence of

murder as charged and sentenced him to death. This appeal is

preferred against the said judgement dated 13th May 2008 of the

High Court Judge of Colombo.

Background Information

2) The main evidence emanated from PW1 Seelawathie the

deceased's widow who was known and related to the accused-

appellant. The witness and appellant lived in the same congested

tenements at Weligoda in the Grandpass area. According to

Seelawathie her husband was killed on the night of 13th of May

2008. This incident was preceded by another incident between

the accused-appellant and the daughter in law of the witness. A

Page 3 of 15

son of PW-1 was married to a daughter of the appellants

grandmother. The 1st witness identifies (in an uncertain manner)

that her daughter-in-laws name is Somawathi and refers to her

as Sudu. When the events in question occurred, the witnesss

son was dead.

3) The accused-appellant and Seelawathie appears to have resided

in houses close to each other. The accused-appellant had got into

an argument with his mother on the 12th of May 2008, and once

more on the 13th of May, when the deceased had intervened and

told the accused-appellant not to come to his house and create

trouble, following which, there had been an exchange of words

between the deceased and the accused-appellant.

4) Then around 8 p.m., the accused-appellant had attacked PW-1s

daughter-in-law, causing an injury to her hand. The Deceased

had intervened to stop this attack. PW-1s daughter-in-law has

then been taken to the Colombo General Hospital by her mother.

Somawathie also states that the accused-appellant also did go to

the hospital to treat an injury to him but she was not sure as to

how the injury was sustained. However, during cross-

examination, it was said that the injuries were due to an attack

from a cleaver (manna knife) by the accused-appellants

brother.

5) Then around 10:15 p.m, when Somawathie happened to be

taking to a friend named Reeta Amma near the gate of Reeta

Amma's house, she had seen the accused-appellant run towards

their house with a club in his hands. Somawathie had then

shouted out to her husband to run; her husband then ran

towards a tea boutique along the road and PW-l Somawathie ran

through the gardens of the houses in the same direction. Then at

one-point Somawathie had seen the accused-appellant dealing

Page 4 of 15

one blow on her husband with a club. It was also submitted that

there was sufficient light at the place of the incident and no one

except the accused-appellant assaulted the deceased.

6) According to the evidence of PW-04 the police witness, on

13.02.2010, a club was recovered at the house of the accused-

appellant, and it was hidden under the roof of a toilet. The

recovery was made on the statement given by the accused-

appellant.

7) The accused-appellant made a dock statement denying that he

committed the murder of the deceased and concluded the case

for the defence on 07.07.2017 (vide page 267 of the appeal brief).

8) According to the accused-appellant, the deceased was a known

drug dealer in the shanty where he was residing, two sons out of

three sons of the deceased had been killed due to their

association with an underworld leader.

9) It was stated that the two deceased sons had a dispute with a

person called Anil residing in that area. Since the accused-

appellant was associating Anil, they have falsely implicated the

accused-appellant in this case.

10) One of the sons was known to have been closely associating an

underworld leader called "Prince Colamn, and they had a

dispute with the aforesaid Anil. They were charged by Grandpass

Police for attacking the house of the aforesaid Anil with a hand

grenade. The accused-appellant was subject to threats due to his

association with Anil.

11) The High Court Judge of Colombo delivered the judgment on

27.04.2018, convicted the Appellant for murder under section

Page 5 of 15

296 of the Penal Code and imposed on the Appellant the death

penalty.

Grounds of Appeal

12) The following are the grounds of appeal raised in the written

submissions of the accused-appellant;

1. Whether the High Court has: Failed to consider the material

contradictions (contradictions per se) and omissions in PW-1s

evidence regarding

i. the time of the brawl; 10:00 11:00 PM (evidence-in-

chief), 8:00 PM (evidence-in-chief) and 5:30 PM

(during cross examination).

ii. the weapon used to allegedly assault PW-1s

daughter-in-law; it was a club (evidence-in-chief) and

a cleaver (kathy knife) (during cross examination)

iii. where she was when the Appellant was seen running

towards the Deceased; Near Reeta Ammas residence

(evidence-in-chief) and Near Nizars tea boutique

(during cross examination).

iv. Omissions in PW-1s evidence.

2. Failed to consider that PW-1 is not a credible witness, and

therefore it was unsafe to convict the appellant solely on her

evidence

3. Failed to consider that the prosecution has not called key

witnesses (this ground was abandoned and not pursued with)

4. Failed to consider the failure to identify the alleged weapon.

5. Failed to consider the Appellants dock statement.

Of the above grounds 1 and 2 will be considered together.

Page 6 of 15

Grounds 1 and 2

Failure to consider the material contradictions (contradictions

per se) and omissions and the credibility of PW1

13) This case is based entirely on the evidence of witness No. 01

Seelawathie the wife of the deceased. She is the sole eye witness

to the incident. The learned Trial Judge has accepted the

evidence of this witness as being credible, truthful and reliable.

Credibility of a witness is a question of fact and not of law. The

acceptance or the rejection of the evidence of a witness is a

question of fact to be determine by the trial Judge. (Kumara De

Silva V. Attorney General, 2010 (2) SriLR 169).

14) The Trial Judge who delivered the judgment of course did not

have the benefit of seeing the demeaner and deportment of PW-1,

Seelawathie. In such circumstances, the Trial Judge had to apply

and rely on the other tests in deciding the credibility and the

reliability of this witness Seelawathie. The main ground of appeal

is that the Trial Judge failed to consider that PW-1 Seelawathie is

not a credible witness and therefore, it was unsafe to convict the

Appellant solely on her evidence. To assail the evidence of

Seelawathie, the Appellants Counsel relies on the contradictions

and omissions which the defence raised at the trial. As correctly

observed by the learned trial judge, the defence failed and did not

prove the said contradictions and omissions. When the attention

of a witness is drawn to a contradictory position in a previous

statement made by such witness in writing such relevant portion

should be brought to his attention as required by section 145 of

the Evidence Ordinance. Then, if the witness does not admit the

previous statement, the cross-examining party is required to prove

such previous statement (such portion). This requirement was

adverted to in Gamini Sugathsena v. the State (1998) 1 Sri LLR

405 as follows;

Page 7 of 15

Although several contradictions were marked when the

accused gave evidence, the proper procedure had not been

followed. When a witness is to be contradicted, the proper

procedure is set out in section 145 of the Evidence

Ordinance. This section contemplates that when a witness

is to be contradicted his attention must be first drawn to the

fact of having made a previous statement, and thereafter,

more specifically, to the parts of the statement which are to

be used for the purpose of contradicting him. It, is only after

that, the actual writing with which the witness was

contradicted with, can be proved. (emphasis added).

15) Therefore, when a contradiction is brought to the attention or an

omission raised unless the witness admits the law requires the proof

of such omissions and contradictions. In the absence or the failure

to prove as aforesaid will render the same as not proved which then

cannot be considered by a trial Judge. In the present matter, the

learned trial judge whilst correctly observing the failure of the

defence to prove and the absence of any admission, nonetheless has

considered. the omissions and contradictions and then opted to

disregard the same. Now lets consider if this finding is reasonable

and correct.

16) As elicited in evidence the fatal incident was preceded by another

fight and dispute between the accused-appellant, his brother and

the daughter-in-law of the deceased. In narrating this previous

incident, the witness has given contradictory evidence as to the time

of the said incident. It ranges between 5.30pm and 10.00pm. Also,

there was some uncertainty as to the weapon used by the Accused

to cause the injury to the daughter of the witness during the said

previous incident. (if it was a club or Kathy). The learned Trial Judge

has considered this and come to the conclusion that it was in respect

Page 8 of 15

of the previous incident and minor which in any event does not go

the root of the evidence. This previous incident involved several

persons and PW-1 has observed this somewhat drawn out and

protracted fracas five years prior to giving evidence. In such

circumstances, the human frailties and memory lapses due to lapse

of time naturally causes such discrepancies. It is settled law that the

court while appreciating the evidence must not attach undue

importance to minor discrepancies. The discrepancies which do not

shake the basic version of the prosecution case may be discarded. The

discrepancies which are due to normal errors of perception or

observation should not be given importance. The errors due to lapse

of memory may be given due allowance. The court by calling into aid

its vast experience of men and matters in different cases must

evaluate the entire material on record by excluding the exaggerated

version given by any witness. When a doubt arises in respect of

certain facts alleged by such witness, the proper course is to ignore

that fact only unless it goes into the root of the matter so as to demolish

the entire prosecution story. The witnesses nowadays go on adding

embellishments to their version perhaps for the fear of their testimony

being rejected by the court. The courts, however, should not disbelieve

the evidence of such witnesses altogether if they are otherwise

trustworthy. ( Appabhai vs. State of Gujarat; 1998 Supp SCC 241).

17) The learned Counsel for the Appellant also strongly submitted that

there is a serious contradiction as to the place from which the

witness claims to have first seen the incident; if it was near Reeta

Ammas house or Nizars boutique. Considering this contradiction the

witness had been extensively questioned on the location and the

setting of the locality. It is apparent that the incident had taken place

in a highly populated shanti dwelling area in the city. Reeta Ammas

residence is in close proximity to Nizars boutique. It is clear that she

had seen her husband the deceased coming from towards the Nizars

boutique when she also observed the Accused charging with a pole

Page 9 of 15

or club. It is when she shouted and warned the deceased to run.

According to the description, both these places are situated in close

proximity and in fact, there is no contradiction but a description of

the same thing in relation to the premises situated at close proximity

and the witness, the deceased as well as the accused-appellant have

all been mobile and moving fast within this area. Therefore, when

recalling and narrating such an incident the locations change with

the mobility of the individual. Therefore, I see no contradiction in PW

1 Somawathies evidence on this point.

18) Finally, the witness claims to have warned the deceased and asked

him to run, when she saw the accused-appellant coming with a pole

which the defence has drawn the attention to as an omission in her

statement to the Police. Neither does Somawathie distinctly admit this

omission, nor, is it proved. Be that as it may, as observed by the trial

Judge, there is no omission as to the fact of seeing the Accused armed

with a pole; chasing behind the deceased or as to the subsequent

assault on the head of the deceased. The said statement had been

made promptly soon after the incident. In narrating this complicated

series of happenings, it is quite possible to have not mentioned an

incidental matter of this nature. Accordingly, the learned Trial Judge

has considered these omission and contradictions and arrived at a

reasonable and a correct decision to disregard the same. In the above

premises I am satisfied that the learned Trial Judges decision to

disregard the said contradictions and omission is reasonable correct.

Ground 4

Failure to the identify the weapon

19) As to the failure to identify the weapon P-2, the Appellant submits that

the witness had at the inquiry and the Police statement described the

weapon and even identified it at the non-summary inquiry. (these

contradictory positions have not been proved). However, the witness

Page 10 of 15

was not able to positively identify when it was shown at the High Court

Trial. Under cross-examination, the witness clearly and consistently

said that though she saw a weapon, she cannot now clearly identify if

it was P-2. Is this inability to identify the same is indicative of being

untruthful or if not being forgetful? According to Somawathie, she

happens to see the accused-appellant pursuing her husband with the

pole and at one point observes a blow being delt then the accused-

appellant almost immediately gives chase to her when she runs for her

dear life. This is late at night. No doubt, there were light bulbs and a

street lamp in and around that area. In these circumstances, is it not

possible for a person to have not observed in detail as to the exact

nature and the form of the pole? The fact that she after five years saying

that she cannot positively identify is to my mind, is nothing but being

truthful and telling what she actually remembers. If she was

untruthful or if in fact, she has not witnessed this incident and is

seeking to falsely implicate the accused-appellant as alleged by the

defence one would expect the witness to simply identify whatever the

weapon shown in the Court. The very fact that she upon examining the

weapon being hesitant is consistent with a witness truthfully narrating

what she has witnessed and remembers. Accordingly, the learned trial

Judge accepting the evidence cannot be assail in anyway. Further, the

learned Trial Judge has not considered the evidence of the weapon or

the section 27 recovery as it was not properly identified.

Ground 5

The dock statement was not considered

20) Final round of appeal is the failure to consider the dock statement. The

learned Trial Judge has specially considered the dock statement and

rejected the same on the basis of failing to explain the alleged

absconding for two years since the incident. Is this a valid basis to

reject a dock statement? An Accused tough is a competent witness is

not a compellable witness. However, an Accused is entitled to give

Page 11 of 15

evidence on his behalf. Similarly, a right of an Accused to make an

unsworn statement from the dock is permitted and accepted within

our jurisdiction along with the right of an Accused to remain silent.

Therefore, an Accused has the option of giving sworn evidence, calling

witnesses, making a statement from the dock or remaining silent. In

the case of the Queen v. Buddharakkita Thero [63 NLR 442.],

Basnayake, C.J., has opined that, "The right of an accused person to

make an unsworn statement from the dock is recognised in our law.

(King v. Vallayan).

21) If the accused opted to exercise his common law right to remain silent

no adverse inference may be drawn. However, if he opts otherwise and

gives evidence or makes a dock statement he then voluntarily and of his

own volition abandons his right to silence and the concomitant privileges

and attributes attached to such right. Further elaborating on the right

to make a dock statement Basnayake, C.J., in the case of the Queen v.

Buddharakkita Thero (Supra), at page 442) held that,

That right would be of no value unless such a statement is

treated as evidence on behalf of the accused subject

however to the infirmity which attaches to statements that

are unsworn and have not been tested by cross-

examination.

Hence, if a dock statement is treated as any other evidence the regular

tests applicable to determine the credibility and reliability of oral

testimony will equally be applicable and relevant. Thus, when a dock

statement is made and it is incomplete or fails to explain certain

incriminating circumstances such dock statement will incomplete and

deficient. (Ajit Samarakoon v The Republic (Kobaigane Murder Case)

(Jayasuriya, J.) [2004] 2 Sri L R 209).

22) The learned Trial Judge has summarized and considered the credibility

of the dock statement (at page 21 of the judgement). Then, upon

evaluating, has rejected the same (at page 30 of the judgement). The

Page 12 of 15

failure of the accused-appellant to explain his absence for two years and

the improbability of making a false allegation due to his association with

a person named Anil were the primary reasons for the rejection of the

dock statement. Apart from this, I also observe that to evaluate the

veracity of a dock statement, the same should be considered holistically

along with the totality of the evidence of such case. One cannot consider

the dock statement in isolation, in a compartmentalised form. In Sarath

vs Attorney General (2006) 3 Sri L R. 96 Eric Basnayake J, on this issue

opined that;

One must bear in mind that when a dock statement is

considered anywhere in the judgment, the judge who heard

the evidence is aware of the prosecution case and would

always consider the dock statement while considering the

prosecution story. One cannot consider the dock statement

in isolation. How can one accept or reject the dock statement

without knowing the other side of the story?

23) As a matter of further comment, when there is uncontradicted and

cogent evidence that the accused-appellant since this incident was

absconding for almost two years it becomes relevant for the reason that

the police have been on the lookout for him and facts have been so

reported to the magistrate almost immediately after the incident. On the

other hand, the deceased happens to be related to the accused-appellant

and in the normal course of events the accused-appellant should

certainly have got to know of this death and the fact that he is wanted

for the same. Therefore, the stark silence and the deliberate avoidance to

state his position clearly renders the dock statement highly deficient.

[Ajit Samarakoon v The Republic (Kobaigane Murder Case) [2004] 2 Sri

LR 209].

24) Then as to the assertion of fabrication and false implication due to

accused-appellants association with one Nimal; it is alleged that a person

named Nimal and the Deceaseds family were enemies and there was a

Page 13 of 15

family feud involving killings. To my mind if the enmity was with Nimal

in the normal course, one would if at all expect Nimal to be falsely

implicated and not Nimals friend the accused-appellant. Thus, this is

highly improbable. Further there is no mention or suggestion of Nimal

during cross examination. It is in the dock statement that Nimal is

mentioned for the first time. This savours of being an afterthought. Thus,

the rejection of the Dock statement cannot be assailed. Accordingly, I see

no reason in law or otherwise to interfere with the finding of facts of the

learned Trial Judge in rejecting the dock statement and there is no merit

in this argument advanced on behalf of the Appellant.

25) The Appellant abandoned the third ground of appeal and did not pursue

with the same.

Is PW-1 Somawathie is an interested witness?

26) It was also argued that PW-1 being the widow of the deceased is an interested

witness as such her evidence is not reliable. She no doubt happens to be the

widow of the deceased and to that extent she naturally will have a familial

affinity. However, this does not make her an unreliable witness or non-

competent on that score alone. More often than not in incidents of this

nature, family members and associates happen to witness such incidents.

Thus, if their affinity per se results in the rejection of evidence proving of

crimes would be greatly affected. Apart from exercising a caution in

evaluating such evidence there is no such principle of law that prevents the

consideration of the evidence of such witnesses.

27) The argument advanced is that PW1 being the widow of the deceased being

an interested witness, her evidence alone is not sufficient to bring home a

conviction for murder. As I see, familial relationships per se will not

inherently compromise a witness's reliability in the absence of direct animus

or malice. A conviction can certainly be recorded on the basis of the

statement of a single eye witness who happens to be a close relative provided

his credibility is not shaken by any adverse circumstances appearing on the

Page 14 of 15

record against him and the Court, at the same time, is convinced that

the witness is a truthful witness. As to the argument raised on behalf

of the accused-appellant that the witness was the widow of the

deceased and was, therefore, highly interested and her evidence be

discarded, and not relied upon to my mind a close relative who is a

natural witness may have an interest but this alone will not suffice to

regard such witness an interested witness. The term "interested"

postulates that the witness must have some direct interest in having

the accused somehow or the other convicted for some animus or for

some other reason.

28) The law of evidence requires credibility of witness and the evidence

against the accused to be unimpeachable so as to convict the accused.

In this scenario often the evidence is discredited on the ground that

the witness is interested i.e. there are reasons extraneous to the trail

for the witness to lead in this evidence and the evidence so tendered

may not be free from bias. However, in Myladimmal Surendran v.

State of Kerala [AIR 2010 Supreme Court 3281, 2010 AIR SCW 5248]

the Supreme Court of India held that, the mere fact that the person

giving the evidence is the wife of the deceased it not sufficient to hold

that the witness is an 'interested witness' to as to reduce the credibility

of the evidence.

29) Then in the case of State of Rajasthan Vs. Smt. Kalki and

Another [(1981) 2 SCC 752] it was opined that: -

"True, it is she is the wife of the deceased, but she cannot be called

an `interested' witness. She is related to the deceased. `Related' is

not equivalent to `interested'. A witness may be called `interested'

only when he or she derives some benefit from the result of a

litigation; in the decree in a civil case or in seeing an accused

person punished. A witness who is a natural one and is the only

possible eye witness in the circumstances of a case cannot be said

Page 15 of 15

to be `interested' in the instant case PW1 had no interest in protecting the

real culprit, and falsely implicating the respondents."

In the above circumstance, this submission lacks merit and is misconceived.

Conclusion

30) It is not the function of the Court of Appeal to retry a prosecution on the

facts and indulge in a re-appraisal of the facts. The jurisdiction of the Court

of Appeal in hearing an appeal preferred by an accused-appellant is to

examine the evidence in the case in order to satisfy ourselves that there is

evidence upon which the Jury or judge could have reached the verdict

which they came to and also similarly to examine the charge to the jury or

the reasons to satisfy ourselves that there has not been any mis-direction

or non-direction. (K v Endoris - 46 NLR 498 2. Ebert Silva v K - 52 NLR

505).

31) For the reasons enumerated above I see no merit in this appeal and the

evaluation of evidence, the findings and the conviction, reached and

imposed respectively by learned trial Judge is justified and lawful.

Accordingly, we proceed to dismiss the appeal of the accused-appellant. The

conviction and sentence are accordingly affirmed.

Appeal is dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Menaka Wijesundera, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL