I ./

,

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Colombo He 7702/06

CA 12/2004

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

1

In the matter of petition of appeal in terms

of Section 331 (1) of the code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

P.W.D. Edwin Wasantha Kumara

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo 12.

COMPLAINT - ATTORNEY GENERAL

: Deepali Wijesundera J.

: L.U. Jayasuriya J.

: Sumith Senanayake for the

Appellant

Dilan Ratnayake DSG for AG

: 18th November, 2016

: 15th December, 2016

,

Oeepali Wijesundera J.

The accused appellant was indicted in the High Court under sec.

403 of the Penal Code and was convicted and sentence to a term of 5

years RI and a fine of Rs. 2,500/= was imposed for both counts. This

appeal has been filed against the said convictions and sentence.

Heard both counsels in respect of their cases. The case of the

prosecution is that the appellant used to purchase glass wear from the

complainant and used to issue post dated cheques. The appellant has

issued two cheques to the value of Rs. 261,346/= and Rs. 425,649/= and

when these cheques were presented to the bank the complainant Was

informed that the account holder has stopped payment. The two letters

sent to the bank by the accused appellant were marked as P1 a and P3a

and the cheques were marked as P1 and P3.

The learned counsel for .the accused appellant argued that the

appellant used to buy glass wear from the complainant and used to issue

postdated cheques and that there had been a practice to return the

damaged items and to get a refund from the money given. We find that

there is no evidence to show that there had been damaged items which

2

,

were returned by the appellant and the dues have been settled. The

complainant in the course of his evidence has admitted that there has been

a practice in the trade to return damaged items but has not admitted

specifically that the accused appellant has returned damaged items.

The learned Deputy Solicitor General referred to sec. 73 of the Bills

of Exchange Act and said that a cheque is an instrument payable on

demand. He further stated that on presentation of the cheque to the bank

there has to be money in the account to pay. The learned Deputy Solicitor

General further stated that the dishonest intention of the accused appellant

is proved by his subsequent conduct after giving the cheques which was

. shown by P1 a and P3a, the two letters issued to the bank to stop payment

without informing the complaint.

Sec. 73 of the Bills of Exchange Act states;

itA cheque is a bill 0/ exchange drawn on a banker payable on

demand.

Except as otherwise provided in this Part, the provisions 0/

this Ordinance applicable to a bill 0/ exchange payable on

demand apply to a cheque".

3

The accused appellant has issued the cheques knowing very well

that there weren't enough funds to honour them. This is proved by the

accused appellant writing to the bank to stop payment. He has not

informed the complainant to whom the cheques were given for the goods

taken. This clearly shows his dishonest intention.

When the complainant was testifying in the High Court his position

had been that the two cheques were given as security (vide page 92 of the

brief). In the dock statement the accused appellant has failed to state that

the cheques were given as security. We find that the learned High Court

Judge has dealt with the above position in detail in his judgment. As stated

by the learned High Court Judge the dishonest intention of the accused

appellant has been proved beyond reasonable doubt in the High Court.

For the afore stated reasons we decide to affirm the judgment of the

High Court dated 18/03/2004 and dismiss the appeal.

Appeal dismissed.

L.U. Jayasuriya J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

4