,

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Case No: CA/WRIT/350/2016

In the matter of an application for mandates in

the nature of writs of Certiorari and/or

Mandamus. Under and in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution.

Claribel Shanthi Ediriweera,

(now Egodawatte) through her

Attorney K.B. Ediriweera of 973C,

Dewatagahawatte Road,

Talangama South,

Talangama.

Petitioner

Vs.

1. R.P.R. Rajapakse,

Land Commissioner General's Department,

Mihikatha Medura, 1200/6,

Rajamalwatte Road,

Battaramulla- 10120.

2. S. Thirhnanne,

Divisional Secretary's Office,

Palindanuwara,

Badureliya- 12230.

3. Udage Lionel Silva

of Galpotta Road,

Midalana,

Morapitiya- 12232.

Before

4. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

P. Padman Surasena, 1. (PICA)

&

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

Respondents

2

Counsel Bimal Rajapaksha with Amrith Rajapaksha and Muditha Perera for

the Petitioner.

U.P. Senasinghe, SC for the 1 st, 2nd and 3rd Respondents.

Argued on : 02/05/2018

Written Submissions of the Petitioner and Respondents filed on: 18/06/2018

Judgment on : 30107/2018

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

In this application, the Petitioner seeks a mandate in the nature of writ of

Certiorari to quash the decision of the 2nd Respondent, marked "P", appointing the

3rd Respondent as successor to the issue of a land grant to the Petitioner's deceased

husband, marked "C", in terms of the Land Development Ordinance (LDO). The

Petitioner is challenging the said decision on the basis that the deceased grantee

3

has not nominated a successor in his lifetime to the land depicted more fully in the

said land grant.

The subject matter which relates to this application is a land in extent of

A2-RO-PO, situated in the village of Midalana, in the District of Kalutara.

KumarasingheThilinahamy, the original permit holder to the said land prior to her

death nominated her second child Wasanth Egodawatta, the husband of the

Petitioner, as permit holder in the original permit marked 3Rl. Wasantha

Egodawatta, by letter dated 22/09/2004, marked Rl, nominated the 3rd

Respondent, a nephew of the grantee as successor to the said permit. The said

nomination has been duly effected by the 2nd Respondent on 11/03/2005, marked

R2, which is registered in the land ledger.

Wasanth Egodawatta, was unaware of the said land grant dated 01/08/1996,

issued in terms of Section 19(4), of the Land Development Ordinance marked "C",

during his lifetime. The fact that the land grant marked (C), registered on

1 0102120 11, was not handed over to the permit holder before his death, is not in

dispute.

The Petitioner submits that the registration of the 3rd Respondent as

successor to the permit after 9 years, ie, on 16103/2005, has no effect in law or any

legal consequences. The Petitioner also states that, she presumes that there was no

inquiry held prior to the decision endorsing the 3 rd Respondents name as successor

on 16103/2005, as reflected in document marked "S". The Petitioner also submits

4

that in the circumstances, the 1 st and 2nd Respondents have failed to make a

decision in compliance with Section 51 and 72 of the LDO.

It is observed that, the nomination of the 3rd Respondent has been duly

registered in the Land Ledger maintained by the 2nd Respondent as reflected in

document marked 3R 1 V, and as such the said nomination conforms with Section

51 of the LDO.

The Petitioner, at present, the registered life interest holder of the said land

grant, questions the validity of a nomination of a successor through a permit, when

there is a subsequent discovery of a grant. The counter argument of the

Respondents are that the issuance of a permit and a subsequent grant in respect of

the same land constitutes one and the same process.

In the case of Mahallege Vidaneralalage Don Agosimmo Vs. Divisional

Secretary, Polonnaruwa and others SC Appeal No. 3012004, the court held, that;

H ..... it is clear from the provisions of the law that the change in the nature

of the holding from that of the permit to a grant is one process and it should

not be taken as two distinct processes for the purpose of annulling a

nomination that has been previously made ... ... "

The Respondent's submit that the exact point in issue in this application

was discussed in the case of Piyasena Vs. Wijesinghe and others 2002 2SLR,

242, where the court held, that;

....

5

" .... it is to be noted that the issuance of a grant changes status of a permit

holder to that of an "owner" who derives title to the land in question (see

Section 2 of the Ordinance). By the amending Act No. 27 of 1981 this

interpretation of "owner" was extended to also cover "a permit holder who

has paid all sums which he is required to pay .... and has complied with all

the other conditions specified in the permit". The satisfaction of "paying all

sums and complying with all conditions" entitles the permit holder to a

grant which "shall" be issued in respect of the said land in terms of Section

19(4) of the same Act. In view of these provisions it could be reasonably

argued that at the time of her death Ukku Bandi was entitled to be

considered as "owner" by virtue of the fact that she had been awarded a

grant. The fact that the grant never reached here and also the fact that the

execution of the grant was never conveyed to her cannot be held against

her. There are circumstances, in her favour and I hold that the nomination

of a successor under the permit becomes converted to nomination made by

her as the owner of the land. In my view this interpretation is in keeping

with the spirit and intention of the amending Act ..... "

As observed earlier, the Petitioner's contention that a proper inquiry was

not held regarding the nomination of the 3 rd Respondent as successor to the permit

is based on presumed facts which the Petitioner has failed to disclose or prove.

Therefore, in the absence of any adverse finding by the 2nd Respondent against the

6

3rd Respondent being the permit holder, the subsequent discovery of a grant in

respect of the same land cannot be held against the said Respondent since it should

not be considered as two distinct processes but as one and the same process.

In all the above circumstances, I hold that the decision made by the 2nd

Respondent as contained in document marked "P" nominating the 3 rd Respondent

as grantee to the said permit is within the legal confines of the Act and should not

be interfered with.

Therefore, the Petition is dismissed without costs.

P. Pad man Surasena, J. (PICA)

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL