1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for mandate in the nature of a Writ of Prohibition, Certiorari and Mandamus under Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. CA (Writ) Application No: 441/2020

W. Palitha De Zoysa Gunasekara, Katudampe, Ratgama.

PETITIONER

Vs. 1. Hon. Minister of Lands, Ministry of Lands.

2. The Secretary, Ministry of Lands. 1st and 2nd Respondents at Mihikatha Medura, Land Secretariat, No. 1200/6, Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla.

3. The Secretary, State Ministry of Postal Services and Professional Development of Journalists.

4. Postmaster General, Department of Post. 3rd and 4th Respondents at Postal Headquarters, No. 310, D.R. Wijewardena Mawatha, Colombo 10.

2

5. Divisional Secretary, Divisional Secretariat, Hikkaduwa.

6. I. J. Chamod Shalinda. 7. W. Manjula Nissanka kumara. 8. T.M. Gaya Kalpani. 9. Maheesha Manohari Edirisinghe. 10. Sumith Priyantha. 11. R. Rani Chandralatha.

All of Katudampe, Rathgama.

RESPONDENTS Before: Arjuna Obeyesekere, J / President of the Court of Appeal Mayadunne Corea, J Counsel: R. Chula Bandara for the Petitioner Dr. Charuka Ekanayake, State Counsel for the Respondents Supported on: 08th February 2021 Decided on: 27th April 2021 Arjuna Obeyesekere, J., P/CA

In this application, the Petitioner is challenging two letters sent to him by the 5th

Respondent,1 the Divisional Secretary, Hikkaduwa requesting him to hand over the

possession of a land situated in Hikkaduwa belonging to the Petitioner which had

been acquired by the State in 2007 under and in terms of the Land Acquisition Act, as

amended (the Act).

In order to assist this Court to determine if formal notice of this application should be

issued on the Respondents, this Court directed:

1 Letters marked P10 and P12.

3

a) The learned State Counsel to file a complete set of the pleadings in CA (Writ)

Application No. 582/2007, which is an application filed by the Petitioner in 2007

challenging the publication of the notice under proviso (a) to Section 38 of the

Act;

b) The learned State Counsel to tender by an affidavit the position of the

Respondents with regard to a letter marked P6 as the said letter formed the

basis of the second argument presented in this application on behalf of the

Petitioner;

c) The learned Counsel for the Petitioner to file the response of the Petitioner to

the aforementioned affidavit.

All three directives have been complied with by the parties.

The learned State Counsel raised two objections with regard to the maintainability of

this application. The first is that the Petitioner does not have the locus standi to have

and maintain this application. The second is that the letters sought to be quashed do

not contain a decision, and that the 5th Respondent was merely implementing the

provisions of the Act in respect of a land the title of which had vested in the State as

far back as 2007. I shall consider these two objections after having considered the

arguments of the learned Counsel for the Petitioner.

The facts of this application very briefly are as follows.

The Petitioner states that his aunt, Mrs. Hemawathie De Zoysa Gunasekara was the

owner of a land in extent of 2R 28.3P situated in Boossa. He states that his aunt

gifted the said property to him by Deed No. 2702 dated 28th July 1998 marked P1,

reserving her life interest in the said land. Although not disclosed in this application,

the Petitioner had divulged the following facts in the petition filed in CA (Writ)

Application No. 582/2007 (the first application):

a) In January 2000, his aunt had informed him that she has received a letter

together with a notice dated 15th December 1999 under Section 4 of the Act

informing her that approximately 50 perches out of the land that had been

4

gifted by her to the Petitioner had been identified for acquisition for a public

purpose;

b) His aunt had also informed him that she has already made representations to

the Secretary, Ministry of Posts and Telecommunication objecting to the

acquisition of her land;

c) The Petitioner had thereafter made inquiries from the Divisional Secretariat,

Hikkaduwa and found that the notice under Section 2 of the Act had been

published on 22nd April 1998, for the establishment of the Boossa Post Office;

d) An inquiry was held in terms of Section 4(3) of the Act to inquire into the said

objections, with the participation of the Petitioner and his aunt;

e) The Petitioner was afforded the opportunity of reiterating his objections to the

proposed acquisition at the said inquiry;

f) The adjoining land had been developed as a Economic Trade Centre, and that

he had proposed that the post office could be located in that building;

g) In response to a question raised by the Inquiry Officer, he had said that if there

was no alternative other than to take over his land he agrees to give away 20-

25 perches to the State for the construction of (a) sub post office.

The above narration in the petition filed in the first application discloses two

important matters. The first is that the alienation of the land by gift to the Petitioner

has been made three months after the publication of the notice under Section 2 of

the Act. I shall discuss at the end of this judgment this issue together with the first

objection of the learned State Counsel with regard to the locus standi of the

Petitioner. The second is that by the Petitioner and his aunt being afforded an

opportunity of placing their objections to the proposed acquisition of their property,

the State had complied with the provisions of Section 4. These facts, although

material to this application, had been suppressed by the Petitioner.

The Petitioner states that as no steps were taken with regard to the acquisition, he

had commenced the construction of a building on the land sought to be acquired in

5

2004. The construction had been completed in 2006/7. It is clear from the several

photographs that have been produced by both parties that the said building is facing

the main road. Access to the rear portion of the land, which has not been acquired, is

from the side of the building.

The Petitioner states that in May 2007, he was served with a notice issued in terms

of proviso (a) to Section 38 of the Act marked P3, published in Extraordinary

Gazette No. 1496/11 dated 9th May 2007. The Petitioner admits that by a letter

dated 11th June 2007 issued by the 6th Respondent, he was directed to hand over the

said property to the State on 21st June 2007. It is not in dispute that a declaration in

terms of Section 5(1) of the Act has been made by the Minister of Lands on 22nd June

2007.

It must be observed that the State was initially seeking to acquire approximately 50P

out of the entire land which was in extent of approximately 109P - vide the notice

under Section 4. The extent of land sought to be acquired, which is facing the main

road, had later been reduced to 40P, as depicted in the Advanced Tracing marked

P9. The reduction of extent is reflected in the notice issued under proviso (a) to

Section 38.

The Petitioner states that having requested for further time to hand over the

property to the (Divisional Secretary) as he was sick and advised to bed rest by his

doctor, he filed the first application on 26th June 2007 challenging the said notice

issued under proviso (a) to Section 38, on the basis that there is no urgency.

It is admitted that the first application was taken up for argument on 2nd July 2010.

The Petitioner states that in view of the submission of the learned State Counsel that

a notice in terms of Section 5 has already been published, his Counsel refrained

from making submissions as it was settled law that the action cannot be maintained

once a notice under Section 5 had been issued. The Petitioner goes onto state that

on this basis this Court had dismissed the said application. While I will advert to this

issue later, I must state that the factual position remains the same, in that there

exists a Section 5 notice that has been published in the Gazette in April 2018, thus

attracting the finality referred to by the Petitioner.

6

The Petitioner states that by a letter dated 15th March 2011 marked P6, the

Secretary, Ministry of Postal Services had informed the Secretary, Ministry of Lands

that the Postmaster General has decided that the land on which the building is

situated, which was part of the land sought to be acquired, is not required and that it

would suffice if the land behind the said building is available for the purpose of

constructing the post office. I shall advert to P6 later.

The Petitioner states that the State did not take any steps after 2011 with regard to

the acquisition, and that he was under the impression that the State has abandoned

the acquisition proceedings, until he received the letter dated 17th November 2020

marked P10, sent by the Divisional Secretary, Hikkaduwa requesting the Petitioner

to be present on 27th November 2020 to hand over possession of the said land. As

the Petitioner did not comply, the Divisional Secretary, Hikkaduwa by letter dated

30th November 2020 marked P12, had once again informed the Petitioner to be

present on 8th December 2020 to hand over possession of the land.

Aggrieved by the above requests to hand over possession of the said land, the

Petitioner filed this application on 7th December 2020, seeking inter alia the following

relief:

(a) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the request of the Divisional Secretary, Hikkaduwa

contained in the letters marked P10 and P12 requiring the Petitioner to hand

over possession of the land vested in the State;

(b) A Writ of Prohibition preventing the Divisional Secretary, Hikkaduwa from

taking over the said land without following due process of the law;

(c) A Writ of Mandamus directing the Minister of Lands to revoke the declaration

made in terms of Section 5, or in the alternative a Writ of Mandamus directing

the 1st Respondent to act in terms of Section 39A of the Act.

It must be noted that the Petitioner is not seeking to quash the notice issued under

proviso (a) to Section 38 of the Act, by which the title to the said land was vested in

the State.

7

Prior to considering the arguments of the learned Counsel for the Petitioner, it would

be useful to briefly consider the procedure laid down in the Act with regard to

acquisition of private land.

The acquisition process set out in the Act commences with Section 2(1), which reads

as follows:

Where the Minister decides that land in any area is needed for any public

purpose, he may direct the acquiring officer of the district in which that area lies

to cause a notice in accordance with subsection (2) to be exhibited in some

conspicuous places in that area.

Thus, in order to initiate the first step in the acquisition process, the State must be

satisfied that there is a necessity to acquire land for a public purpose. A notice under

Section 2(1) would generally refer to land in any area out of which a particular land is

to be chosen pursuant to investigations as to its suitability.

In terms of Section 2(3), any officer authorised by the Acquiring Officer may carry out

on any land in the area referred to in Section 2(1), the activity set out in Section 2(3),

and all other acts necessary, in order to investigate the suitability of that land for the

public purpose mentioned in the notice, including the carrying out of surveys,

checking the subsoil, demarcating boundaries, etc. Section 2(3) therefore sets out

the second step of the acquisition process, which is to investigate the suitability of

the land referred to in the Section 2(1) notice.

In terms of Section 4(1), once the Minister considers that a particular land is suitable

for a public purpose, he shall direct the Acquiring Officer to cause a notice in

accordance with Section 4(3) to be given to the owner or owners of that land and to

be exhibited in some conspicuous place on or near that land. The notice under

Section 4(3) shall state inter alia that the State intends to acquire that land for a

public purpose, and that written objections to the intended acquisition may be made

to the Secretary to such Ministry as shall be specified in the notice.

8

The Supreme Court, in Manel Fernando and Another v. D.M. Jayaratne, Minister of

Agriculture and Lands and Others2, held that, the object of section 4(3) is to enable

the owner to submit his objections: which would legitimately include an objection

that his land is not suitable for the public purpose which the State has in mind, or that

there are other and more suitable lands.

It is clear that necessity and suitability are but two sides of the same coin, and that

the objections of the landowner to the Acquiring Officer can extend to challenging

the necessity of an acquisition.

In terms of Section 4(4), where a notice relating to the intended acquisition is

exhibited, and objections are made to the Secretary by any persons interested in

such land and within the time allowed, the appropriate Secretary shall consider such

objections, either by himself, or through an Officer appointed by the Secretary.

Section 4(4) specifies further that, when such objections are considered every

objector shall be given an opportunity of being heard in support thereof. It is only

after the consideration of the objections that the Secretary shall make his

recommendations to the Minister, who is then required to make his

recommendations to the Minister in charge of the subject of lands. In terms of

Section 4(5) of the Act, the Minister of Lands must be satisfied that there is a

necessity of a land for a public purpose and suitability of a particular land for that

particular purpose, in order to arrive at a decision in terms of Section 4(5) that the

land referred to in the Section 4(1) notice must be acquired.

It is clear from the petition in the first application that an inquiry was in fact held and

that the Petitioner was afforded an opportunity of placing his objections to the

acquisition. The provisions of Section 4 have therefore been complied with and the

Petitioner has no complaint with the procedure followed.

The decision in terms of Section 4(5) is followed by Section 5 of the Act, which reads

as follows:

(1) Where the Minister decides under subsection (5) of section 4 that a

particular land ... should be acquired under this Act, he shall make a

2 [2000] 1 Sri LR 112.

9

written declaration that such land ... is needed for a public purpose and

will be acquired under this Act, and shall direct the acquiring officer of the

district in which the land which is to be acquired ... is situated, to cause

such declaration in the Sinhala, Tamil and English languages to be

published in the Gazette and exhibited in some conspicuous places on or

near that land.

(2) A declaration made under subsection (1) in respect of any land ... shall be

conclusive evidence that such land ... is needed for a public purpose.

(3) The publication of a declaration under subsection (1) in the Gazette shall

be conclusive evidence of the fact that such declaration was duly made.

Thus, once the Minister decides under Section 4(5) that a particular land should be

acquired under the Act, he shall make a written declaration as provided in Section

5(1) that such land is needed for a public purpose and will be acquired under the Act.

While in terms of Section 5(2), a declaration made under Section 5(1) shall be

conclusive evidence that such land is needed for a public purpose, in terms of Section

5(3), the publication of a declaration under Section 5(1) in the Gazette shall be

conclusive evidence of the fact that such declaration was duly made.

In D.H. Gunasekera and Others v Minister of Lands and Agriculture and another,3 it

was held as follows:

Counsel for the Petitioners concedes that a declaration under Section 5(1) of

the Act has been published by the Minister in the Gazette. The consequence of

the publication of that declaration is that sub-section (2) of Section 5 operates

to render the declaration conclusive evidence that the land was needed for a

public purpose. The question whether the land should or should not be

acquired is one of policy to be determined by the Minister concerned and even

if that question may have been wrongly decided, sub-section (2) of section 5

renders the position one which cannot be questioned in the Courts.

3 65 NLR 119 at 120.

10

A similar position was taken up in Hewawasam Gamage v. The Minister of

Agriculture4 where it was held as follows:

I am of opinion that on the construction I place of section 2(1) and proviso (a)

to section 38, the Court cannot question the decision or the order of the Minister

and substitute its judgment in place of that of the Minister and hold that the

decision of the Minister was wrong, namely, that the land was needed for a

public purpose. The decision whether the land should or should not be acquired

is one of policy to be determined by the Minister concerned and therefore

cannot be questioned by the Court of Law.5

The next step in the acquisition process is to initiate the payment of compensation to

the land owner, in accordance with the provisions contained in Sections 7, 9 and 10,

culminating in an award under Section 17(1). It is only after an award is made under

Section 17 that the Minister may, by an Order published in the Gazette in terms of

Section 38 (a), direct the Acquiring Officer to take possession of the land, for and on

behalf of the State, thus bringing the process of acquisition to a close.

The legislature has recognised that there may be circumstances which demand that

possession be taken over on behalf of the State earlier than what the

aforementioned procedure provides for, and has given effect to such requirement by

including a proviso to Section 38, which reads as follows:

Provided that the Minister may make an Order under the preceding provisions

of this Section

(a) where it becomes necessary to take immediate possession of any land on

the ground of any urgency, at any time after a notice under Section 2 is

exhibited for the first time in the area in which that land is situated or at

any time after a notice under Section 4 is exhibited for the first time on or

near that land, and

(b) .............

4 76 NLR 25 at page 32.. 5 See Gnanawathie Edirisinghe v. Minister of Lands and Land Development CA (Writ) 500/2008; CA Minutes of

21st February 2011.

11

In Marie Indira Fernandopulle and Another v E. L. Senanayake, Minister of Lands

and Agriculture,6 the Supreme Court, referring to the above scheme of the Act,

stated as follows:

The provisions of section 38 states that the Minister may by order published in

the Gazette "at any time after the award is made under section 17 direct the

acquiring officer to take possession of the land or servitude acquired, as the

case may be. Such an order is a vesting order and vests title in the State

absolutely and free from all encumbrances from the date of the order. It must

be noted that the Minister ordinarily has no power to vest the land in the State

until an award is made in terms of section 17 of the Act. Even though the

market value is calculated as at the date of the notice under section 7 the award

can only be made after 21 days of the date of the notice. If there is a reference

to Court under the provisions of section 10 of the Act such award will be made

at such later date (section 17). Whatever the length of time the Act makes it

clear that in the first place possession only be taken after the award is made

and after the quantum of compensation offered is made known to the

claimants. Any vesting order made before such award would be an act in excess

of powers. The intention of the legislature is clear, i.e., that the officers of the

State cannot take possession until and unless an offer of payment of

compensation is made and the acquisition proceedings are concluded. It is only

then that the Act recognises the States right to possession of the land.

The proviso to section 38 is a departure from this general rule. It empowers the

Minister, on behalf of the State, to take immediate possession where it

becomes necessary to take immediate possession of any land on the ground of

any urgency. [emphasis added]

Thus, taking over possession of a land that is to be acquired can happen at different

stages of the acquisition process. Unless it is urgent, the earliest point of time at

which possession can be taken is after the publication of an award under Section 17.

However, on the ground of urgency, the Minister can make an order under proviso

679 (II) NLR 115 at page 117.

12

(a) to Section 38 to take immediate possession of the land any time after the

publication of a notice under Section 2.

In the light of the above legal provisions, the factual position of this application can

be summarised as follows:

a) The notices under Sections 2 and 4 have been published;

b) The inquiry under Section 4 has been held with the participation of the

Petitioner;

c) The declaration under Section 5(1) has been made, with the result that there is

conclusiveness with regard to necessity and suitability of the land for the

construction of a post office;

d) By virtue of the publication of the notice under proviso (a) to Section 38, the

title to the land is vested in the State.

I shall now consider the two arguments presented before this Court by the learned

Counsel for the Petitioner.

The first is that the learned State Counsel who appeared in the first application had

submitted to Court that the notice under Section 5 has been published, when in fact

no such notice had been published. He submitted that due to this submission, the

learned Counsel who appeared for the Petitioner in the first application refrained

from making submissions as it was settled law that the action cannot be maintained

once a notice under Section 5 had been issued and that it is on this basis that this

Court made order dismissing the Petitioners first application.7

This submission is not factually correct, for two reasons. The first is that in paragraph

9 of the Statement of Objections filed in the first application, it has been stated that

consequent to the notice in terms of proviso (a) to Section 38, a notice in terms of

Section 5 of the Land Acquisition Act (as amended) was published on 22nd June 2007

with regard to an extent of 0.101 hectares. A certified copy of the notice under

7 Vide paragraphs 15 and 16 of the petition.

13

Section 5 had thereafter been annexed as 1R6. What has been annexed as 1R6 is

the signed declaration made by the then Minister of Lands and Land Development,

supported by an affidavit of the said Minister of Lands who had signed 1R6. While

the Section 5(1) notice had not been published in the Gazette, the Section 5 notice

referred to by the State was available for the Petitioner to see. Therefore, it was

open to the Petitioner to take any objection with regard to the legality or validity of

the said notice, which the Petitioner did not do.

The judgment of this Court marked P5 correctly records that, The learned State

Counsel submitted (that) Section 5 notice was also published on 22.06.2007. As

Section 5 notice is now published it is settled law that the public purpose cannot be

challenged in these proceedings. This position is factually correct, in that there

existed a Section 5 notice and therefore this Court has not been misled by the

learned State Counsel, as alleged by the Petitioner.

If it was the position of the Petitioner that for the Section 5 notice to be valid, it must

be published in the Gazette, there was nothing that prevented the Petitioner from

taking up that position. The Petitioner cannot now cry foul. In any event, the legal

position in Section 5(2) that a declaration made under Section 5(1) in respect of any

land shall be conclusive evidence that such land is needed for a public purpose

applies to the declaration made under Section 5(1). While the publication of a

declaration in the Gazette is conclusive evidence that the declaration has been made,

the validity of the said declaration is not dependent on the publication of the said

declaration in the Gazette.

The second reason why the first submission of the learned Counsel for the Petitioner

is not correct is in view of the following paragraph of the judgment P5:

Further the petitioners have not established that there is no urgency in

acquiring this land as the public purpose is for a post office and the respondents

have taken steps to establish this post office but they could not proceed further

due to the filing of this application and as the petitioner has not established any

grounds to issue a writ of certiorari to quash section 38 (a) order, Court dismiss

this application without costs.

14

It is therefore evident that the said application had been dismissed not only because

of the submission that a Section 5 notice had been published but also for the reason

that the Petitioner had failed to establish that there is no urgency in acquiring this

land. The Petitioner has not filed an appeal against the said judgment and is

therefore estopped from challenging the necessity, suitability and urgency of the

acquisition, in this application.

The second argument of the learned Counsel for the Petitioner is based on the letter

P6, which reads as follows:

fuu w;alr .ekSu iusnkaOfhka bvfus uq,a whs;slrejka, wNshdpkdOslrKhg bosrsm;a

lr ;snQ wxl 582/07 orK wNshdpkh m%;slafIam jS we;. (wNshdpkdOslrK ;Skaoqfjs

msgm;la wuqKd we;.) kvq lghq;= wjika jS we;s nejska, w;alrf.k we;s bvfus fhdacs;

;eme,a ldrahd, f.dvke.s,a, fuu jir ;=< bos l< hq;= nj i|yka lruska, ;eme,am;s

mjrd f.k we;s bvus fldgfia N=la;sh Ndr fok fuka b,a,d we;. ;eme,am;s ud fj; tjd we;s 2011.01.31 yd 2011.03.07 oske;s ,smsj, msgm;a fuhg

wuqKd tjus. ta wkqj, bvus w;alr .ekSfus mk; hgf;a w;alrf.k we;s bvfus fldgil

uq,a ysuslre jsiska lv ldur myla iys; fouy,a f.dvke.s,a,la boslr noqoS we;s nejska, tu f.dvke.s,a,g ydks fkdjkfia ksis m%fjsY udra. iys;j m%Odk udra.hg wdikakfhka mrapia 40 l bvus fldgila ;eme,a ldrahd,h i|yd ,nd .ekSu iqoqiq hehs ;eme,am;s ksrafoaY lr we;. ;eme,am;sf.a ksrafoaY mrsos, oekg w;alrf.k we;s bvfus boslr we;ehs i|yka f.dvke.s,a, wh;a fkdjkfia m%Odk udra.hg wdikakfhka mrapia 40l ysia bvus fldgila kej; uskqus lghq;= lr, ksrjq,aj ;eme,a fomdra;fuka;=jg ,ndfok fuka yd ta

wkqj, w;alrf.k we;s bvfus b;srs bvus fldgia, bvus w;alr .ekSfus mkf;a jsOsjsOdk

mrsos, wji;= lsrSu iqoqiq njo ksrafoaY lrus. wkjYH bvus fldgia wji;= lsrSug, .re wud;H;=udf.a ksrafoaYh ,nd .ekSug yelsjk

mrsos, ;eme,a ldrahd,h i|yd wjYHjk mrapia 40 l fldgi kej; uek fjkalr, msUqre

m;a lrfok fuka ldreKslj b,a,us.

I must observe at the outset that this letter has not been addressed to the Petitioner,

and is only an internal correspondence. In any event, it is clear that the Minister of

Lands did not act on P6.

15

As I have already held, the necessity and suitability of the Petitioners land for the

establishment of a post office has been decided at an inquiry held with the

participation of the Petitioner in terms of Section 4 as far back as 2004. The written

declaration made by the Minister under Section 5(1) in 2007 is conclusive proof that

the said land is needed for the post office. The argument of the Petitioner that P6

having been issued four years after the said written declaration of the Minister

demonstrates that the land is no longer required for the aforementioned public

purpose is rebutted by the fact that the Minister of Lands has made a further written

declaration in 2018 under Section 5(1), marked P8. This declaration has been

published in the Gazette. What prevails now is this declaration, thereby bringing

finality as provided by Section 5(2) of the Act.

In order to ascertain if the said land is no longer required, this Court directed the

learned State Counsel to tender by an affidavit the present position of the

Respondents with regard to P6, and afforded the Petitioner an opportunity to

respond thereto.

In his affidavit, the Secretary, Ministry of Mass Media has stated as follows:

a) The requirement of the State being 40P, if any land is excluded as set out in

P6, the area of the land remaining bordering the main road would not be

sufficient to meet the requirement of the State;

b) Releasing the land on which the building is situated would result in only the

land behind the said building being available, which land is not suitable for the

said public purpose;

c) The letter P6 has been issued without considering the ground realities

relevant to the said premises;

d) The Boossa Post Office for which the land has been acquired, is presently

housed in a building which cannot accommodate the basic needs of the staff

and the members of the Public that frequent the said post office.

In his reply, the Petitioner has sought to argue that the land behind the building is

suitable for a post office. However, this Court cannot go into the question of

16

necessity and suitability at this stage, and due deference must be shown to the

conclusive nature of a written declaration made in terms of Section 5(1). In doing so,

I am mindful of the fact that the necessity and suitability of the said land has been

determined in terms of an inquiry held in accordance with the provisions of Section

4, and that the order in terms of proviso (a) to Section 38 was made only thereafter.8

I therefore cannot agree with the second argument of the learned Counsel for the

Petitioner.

I shall now discuss the two objections raised by the learned State Counsel with

regard to the maintainability of this application.

The first is that the Petitioner does not have the locus standi to have and maintain

this application. This argument is based on the factual premise that by the time the

Deed of Gift in favour of the Petitioner was executed on 28th July 1998, there was in

place the Section 2 notice published on 22nd April 1998. In terms of Section 4A(1)(a)

of the Act:

Where a notice has been issued or exhibited in respect of any land under

section 2 or section 4, no owner of that land shall, during the period of twelve

months after the date of the issue or exhibition of such notice, sell or otherwise

dispose of that land.

The consequence of such disposal is set out in Section 4A(2), which provides that:

Any sale or other disposal of land in contravention of the provisions of subsection (1) (a) of this section shall be null and void

As the Petitioner has acquired the property within the time period specified in

Section 4A(1), I agree with the submission of the learned State Counsel that the

Petitioner does not have the locus standi to have and maintain this application.

The second objection raised by the learned State Counsel is that the letters sought to

be quashed P10 and P12 - do not contain a decision, and that the 5th Respondent

was merely implementing the provisions of the Act in respect of a land the title of

8 See N.M. Gunatilake and Others vs Gayantha Karunathilake, Minister of Lands and Others [CA (Writ) Application No. 387/2017; CA Minutes of 21st September 2020].

17

which had vested in the State as far back as 2007. While it is trite law that a Writ of

Certiorari is available to quash a decision affecting the rights of an individual, it must

be noted that even the Petitioner refers to P10 and P12 as requests. In any event,

in terms of Section 40(a), once an order is published in terms of Section 38, the

officer who is authorised by that Order in this case, the Divisional Secretary,

Hikkaduwa9 - may take possession of that land for and on behalf of the State. Thus,

the Divisional Secretary is only acting in terms of Section 40, having complied with

Section 42(1) which requires him to give notice to the occupier of his intention to

take possession. It is therefore clear that the Divisional Secretary is merely complying

with the law and has not arrived at a decision affecting the rights of the Petitioner in

doing so. I am therefore in agreement with the submission of the learned State

Counsel that a Writ of Certiorari and a Writ of Prohibition will not lie to quash P10

and P12.

In the above circumstances, I do not see any legal basis to issue formal notice of this

application on the Respondents. This application is accordingly dismissed, without

costs.

President of the Court of Appeal

Mayadunne Corea, J

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal

9 Vide paragraph 1 of the Schedule to the Section 38 proviso (a) notice, marked P3.