i

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

1

In the matter of an Application for Writs in

the nature of Certiorari, Mandamus and

Prohibition under Article 140 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

PJ. Anoma,

Adarsha Junction,

Kananwila,

Horana.

Case No: CAlWRIT/148/2014 Vs.

1. Chandrani Samarakoon,

Petitioner

Commissioner of Local Government- Western

Province,

No.2, Cambridge Terrace,

Colombo 07.

2. S. Alawi Moulana,

Governor-Western Province,

Secretariat of the Governor-Western Province,

98/4,

Havelock Road,

Colombo 05.

3. Horana Pradeshiya Sabha,

Kananwila,

Horana.

4. Y.C. Hathurusinghe,

The Chairman,

'Horana Pradeshiya Sabha',

Kananwila, Horana.

5. M. Sirimewan De Silva,

No: 25, Kanda Kurunduwatta,

Dediyawela,

Waskaduwa.

6. A.M. Karunaratne, Chairman,

7. B.G.H.A. Mahendra Silva, Member,

8. A. Mustapha, Member,

9. H. Sumanapala, Member,

10. AshroffGhani, Member,

2

6th to 10th All of Western Province Provincial

Public Service Commission, No. 53217,

Elvitigala Mawatha, Narahenpita,

Colombo-OS.

11. V. Rajapakse,

Secretary.

Western Province Provincial Public Service

Commission,

No. 53217, Elvitigala Mawatha,

Narahenpita,Colombo 05.

Respondents

Before

Counsel

P. Pad man Surasena, J. (PICA)

&

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

J.C. Weliamuna, PC with Pasindu Silva for the Petitioner.

Shantha Jayawardhana with Hiranya Damunupola for the 3rd and

4th Respondents.

U.P. Senasinghe, SC for the 1 S\ 2nd and 5th to 11 th Respondents.

Written Submissions of the Petitioner filed on: 04/04/2018

3

Written Submissions of the 1st, 2nd & 6th to 11 th Respondents filed on: 11104/2018

Argued on 09/03/2018

Judgment on 02/07/2018

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne .J.

The Petitioner has invoked the jurisdiction of this Court, inter alia, to seek a

mandate in the nature of writ of Certiorari to quash the order of the disciplinary

inquiry and the decision to transfer the Petitioner to the Bandaragama Pradeshiya

Sabha, as contained in the impugned document marked P 18, read with PI 0, and a

mandate in the nature of writ of Prohibition to prevent the Respondents from

recovering a sum of Rs. 10,7001- from the Petitioner as contained in document

marked P18.

4

At the conclusion of the disciplinary mqUlry held in terms of Chapter

XL VII Section 24:6 of the Establishment Code, the 1st Respondent by order dated

31/03/2014, marked P 18, found the Petitioner guilty of charge No. I, II and VIII.

Charge No. I relates to the installation of a used Air Conditioner in the office of

the Chairman of the Pradeshiya Sabha and charge No. II relates to

misappropriation of machinery of the said Pradeshiya Sabha. Charge No. VIII is a

consequential charge.

The Petitioner challenges the said decision on the basis that, "Charge No. L is

based solely on Rule I77. and the charge does not read with Rule 178, and

therefore the charge is vague. ,.

Charge No. I, is as follows;

"Committing a wrong under Chapter No. 15 of the Ft Schedule to chapter

XLVIII of the nstablishment Code by acting in violation or intentionally

evading to follow Rule 177 of the Pradeshiya Sabha (Financial and

Administrative) Rules in purchasing an Air Conditioner Plant for the

Chairman's Office Room. "

Charge No. I, based on Rule 177, is to be read with provisions set out in

Rule 178. However, the Petitioner states that the said charge was formulated

exclusively based on Rule 177. The Petitioner submits that "the said Rule refers to

the procedure in general and does not refer to any specific legal provision." Rule

5

177 deals with any supply of material exceeding the expenditure of Rs. 50,0001-

or more. The Procedural Rule applicable is Rule 178.

It is observed that the above contention of the Petitioner is totally

contradictory to the contents of paragraph 32 (d), of the affidavit, under heading

"1988 Pradeshiya Sabha (Financial & Administration) Regulations", where it is

stated;

(d) Tender Procedure:-

(i) For a contract to obtain services or works or goods with expenditure of

Rs. 50,000 and above, the procedure given in the Regulations there under should

be followed (Regulation 177)

(ii) Regulation 178, describes the tender procedure which should be

followed in instances stated under regulation 177.

The Petitioner submits that "she understood the charge as been one

exclusively on rule 177 only". However as noted above, the Petitioner, in her

pleadings has contradicted the said assertion on this material issue. The Petitioner,

a Class I Officer of the Local Government Management Service with more than 20

years experience in public service and having served in several other Pradeshiya

Sabha's prior to holding the-present position, cannot be heard to plead ignorance

of the Procedural Rule that the tender procedure contemplated in Regulation 177,

, : . ';.'.

6

is not to be read in isolation, but to be read together with the provisions set out in

Rule 178, which deals with all its procedural requirements.

Rule 177, states;

"the procedure set out in these rules shall apply to any contract for the

execution or performance of any work or service or any supply of material

or any other matter exceeding the expenditure or Rs. 5,000/- or more. "

Rule 178 (5), requires for calling open tenders exhibited in public places

and published in at least two newspapers specially when the work costs exceeds

Rs. 100,0001-. The cost of the Air Conditioner installed has exceeded the amount

specified in the said Rule.

In the circumstances, the Petitioner now cannot complain of vagueness of

charges preferred against her. Accordingly, the Petitioner's conduct on procuring

the air conditioner plant in violation of Rule 177 of the Financial and

Administrative Regulations: 1989, published in the Extraordinary Gazette

Notification No. 554/5, dated 1710411989, marked X, has been formulated to the

best of her understanding of the charge brought against her.

It is common ground that on an appeal to the impugned decision of the

disciplinary inquiry, the Provincial Public Service Commission has decided to

recover the loss incurred by the installation of the air conditioning plant from all

relevant officers. Therefore, due to the variation of the decision challenged and the

r

7

consequent change in circumstances the recovery of the total loss from the

Petitioner would not arise for consideration at this stage.

The 1 st Respondent has also brought to the notice of Court that the

Petitioner was able to prefer an appeal to the Governor in this regard, but has

failed to follow up with the process, which is an effective and an equally

convenient alternate remedy. It is observed that the Petitioner has withdrawn an

appeal preferred to the Governor against the impugned decision, without awaiting

the outcome of the appeal which would amount to a failure to exhaust an

administrative remedy available to the Petitioner provided by Section 33 (8), of

the Provincial Council Act No. 42 of 1987 (as amended).

Section 33(8) states,

"The Governor of a province shall have the power to alter, vary or rescind

any appointment, order or transfer or dismissal or any other order relating to a

disciplinary matter made by the Provincial Public Service Commission of that

province, on appeal or otherwise, or by the Chief Secretary or any officer of the

Provincial Public Service of that province, to whom such Provincial Public

Service Commission has delegated its powers under. section 32."

The 1 st Respondent has cited the case of Mendis Vs. Land Reform

Commission and othersSC Appeal No. 9012009, where the court held;

8

"Even if such ground to issue a writ of certiorari and mandamus could be

established, court has also to consider whether the Petitioners are

disentitled to the relief prayed jar even if the grounds of issuing a writ are

satisfied, due to the discretionary nature of the remedy. It is common

ground that courts are reluctant and on numerous occasions refused to

issue propagative writs if it could be established and Petitioners are guilty

of/and or disentitled to the remedy, based on (a) laches / undue delay -------

availability of alternate remedy------"

In all the above reasons it is the view of this Court that the Petitioner has

not established any legal basis for this Court to grant any of the reliefs prayed for.

Therefore, the Petition is dismissed without costs.

P. Padman Surasena, J. (PICA)

I agree ..

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL