IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

CA. No. 213/97(F)

SOCIALIST REPUBLICOF SRI LANKA

1. JuwandarageHerasPerera

2. (Mrs.) K. SomawathiePerera

Both of No. 33, CornelisMawatha

Udahamulla, Nu~egoda.

Plaintiffs

DC Mt. lavinia Case No. 1850/l

Vs

Mrs. P. Murine Kusumawathie

Of No. 15/2, Udumulla Passage

Pagoda, Nugegoda.

Defendant

AND

1. JuwandarageHerasPerera (dead)

2. (Mrs.) K. SomawathiePerera

Both of No. 33, CornelisMawatha

Udahamulla, Nugegoda.

Plaintiff-Appellants

1A JuwandarageDharmasiriPerera

Of No. 38, CornelisMawatha

Udahamulla, Nugegoda.

a; 2A JuwandarageDharmasiriPerera

Of No. 38, CornelisMawatha

Udahamulla, Nugegoda.

Substituted Plaintiff-Appellant

1

/

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

2

Vs

Mrs. P. Murine Kusumawathie

Of No. 15/2, Udumulla Passage

Pagoda, Nugegoda. (dead)

Defendant-Respondent

Ahangamage Vaj ira Wi j ayanthi

Fernando, No. 24, SubadraMawatha

Thalawathugoda Road

Pitakotte. (Substituted in place of the

Defendant-Respondent)

Substituted Defendant-Respondent

:DeepaliWijesundera J.

: M.M.A. Gaffoor J.

:Gamini Jayasinghe with

Jaliya De Silva and Purani

De Silva for the Substituted

Plaintiff Appellant.

P. Liyanage for the Substituted

Defendant Respondent.

: 12th Mirch, 2015

: osth November, 2015

DeepaliWijesundera J.

The plaintiff appellant has filed a case against the defendant

respondent in the District Court for a declaration of title and for

ejectment from the land described in the schedule to the plaint. After

trial the learned District Judge on 27/02/1997 has dismissed the

plaintiffs case. The plaintiff appellant has filed this application to set

aside the said judgment of the District Court.

The learned counsel for the plaintiff appellants submitted lot H in

plan no. 145 was acquired entirely by the first and second plaintiff

appellants as pleaded in the plaint filed in the District Court. Wilson

Perera brother of the second plaintiff who was allowed to occupy

premises no. 15/2 by the plaintiffs has given the said premises to the

defendant's husband on a lease and later transferred it to the defendant

on a deed in 1986. The defendant has claimed title to the said land on

this deed. Wilson Perera has died in December 1987 after the property

was transferred to the defendant's husband. The counsel for the plaintiff

appellant submitted that Wilson Perera had no title to transfer to the

defendant's husband, that he only occupied the said premises on the

permission given by the plaintiff appellants.

3

The plaintiff appellants stated that there is a definite finding in the

issues that the division pleaded by the plaintiff took place upon plan no.

145 in the year 1949 and lot H was allocated to the second plaintiff and

some other co-owners which were later acquired by the first and second

plaintiffs. He further stated that there is also the. finding that Wilson

Perera became a co-owner of lot G with David Perera. Appellant stated

hence in the year 1986 Wilson Perera could not have conveyed any

share from lot H which according to the District Judge's findings and

since the plaintiffs had exclusive title. Appellants stated the defendant

respondent did not have paper title to lot H. The claim for prescriptive

title, by the defendant can not stand since the defendant had agreed

that they came into occupation as a tenant until 1986 when the transfer

deed was given. The District Court case has been filed in 1988 therefore

it is impossible to claim prescriptive rights.

The appellant citing the judgment in Podihamy vs Elaris and

others 1988 2 SLR 129 and Sirajudeen and two others vs Abbas

1994 2 SLR 365 and stated that there is no evidence of adverse

possession by Wilson Perera as stated in the above judgments and that

<:

there is no evidence in this regard.

4

The defendant respondent submitted that the second plaintiff and

Wilson Perera were children of David Perera and Wilson Perera resided

in the land and premises bearing no. 2115 which is the subject matter of

this action. The house bearing no. 2115 was rented out to the husband

of the defendant by Wilson Perera and later transferred to him by deed

no. 314 in 1986.After Wilson Perera's death in 1987 the plaintiff has

instituted action in the District Court to eject the defendant. The

respondent stated that the first plaintiff appellant admitted the ownership

of Wilson Perera in the District Court while giving evidence. He further

submitted that on the basis of the admission of the first plaintiff appellant

the learned District Judge has arrived at a fair conclusion in his

judgment.

The issue to be decided in the instant case is did Wilson Perera

have title to lot H to transfer premises in suit. On the first plaintiff

appellant's own admission while giving evidence in the District Court it

has been proved that Wilson Perera had title to premises 2115. If the

plaintiff appellant got the entirety of lot H in plan no. 145 Wilson Perera

could not have conveyed no. 2115 to the defendant's husband which is

in lot H.

5

The learned District Judge had considered and evaluated the

evidence placed before him and come to the conclusion that Wilson

Perera had title to transfer the premises no. 2115. It is the duty of the

trial judge to evaluate the evidence placed before him and come to the

correct conclusion. The appellate court will not interfere in such findings

unless there is a grave misdirection by the District Judge.

On perusal of the judgment and the evidence placed before the

District Court I see nothing wrong with the learned District Judge's

findings. The learned District Judge has carefully analyzed the evidence

placed before him.

For the afore stated reasons I decided to affirm the learned

District Judge's judgment dated 27/02/1997 and dismiss the appeal with

costs fixed at Rs. 10,000/=.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

M.M.A. Gaffoor J. "

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

6