----------~-----~-----

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Case No. CA 13/2017

Appeal in the terms of Section 331 of

Criminal Procedure Code.

The Democratic Soc!alists Republic of

Sri Lanka

COMPLAINANT

Vs

Hewa Pasgodage Premathilaka

Horawela

Walasmulla.

ACCUSED

HC (Tangalle) Case No. 22/2012 AND NOW BETWEEN

1

Hewa Pasgodage Premathilake

Horawela

Walasmulla.

ACCUSED - APPELLANT

Vs

Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo. 12.

COMPLAINANT - RESPONDENT

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

L.U. Jayasuriya J.

~ ~-~-----------------

: Deepali Wijesundera J.

: L.U. Jayasuriya J.

: Kaushalya Abeyratne Dias for the

Accused - Appellant

Dileepa Peiris D.S.G. for the

Attorney General

: 28th November, 2017

: 14th December, 2017

The accused appellant was indicted in the High Court of Tangalle

under the following counts.

1. That during the period from 1st February to 26th March, 2004 the

appellant committed rape on Hewa Pasgodage Sandya Kumari

who was below 16 years of age, an offence punishable under

Section 364 (3) of the Penal Code as amended.

2. That during the same period except the occasion referred to in

count No.1, the appellant committed rape on Hewa Pasgodage

Sandya Kumari, an offence punishable under Section 364 (3) of

the Penal Code as amended.

2

- _.--~---- --------.----.-.-._------------

After trial the appellant was convicted on the first count and imposed

a sentence of 10 years RI and a fine of Rs. 5,000/= carrying a default term

of 3 months. He was acquitted on the second count. This appeal is from

the said conviction and the sentence.

The story of the prosecution is that on the day in question, while the

victim (who has 10 years old at the time of the incident) was attending to

her school work, the appellant placed the victim on a bed after carrying her

and raped her.

After the case for the prosecution was concluded the appellant has

made a dock statement, and has denied his involvement to the incident.

The learned counsel for the appellant argued that the prosecution had not

established the date of offence

On a perusal of the evidence of the victim we find that the learned

Stated Counsel has not ascertained the date of the offence. Even a police

constable prosecutia,9 in the Magistrate's Court knows that the prosecution

should establish the date of offence but the State Counsel was so negligent

and has failed to ascertain the date of the offence.

3

We find that the learned High Court Judge too has acted as a sleeping

umpire and was not mindful of the fact that it was her duty to pose relevant

questions under Section 165 of the Evidence Ordinance.

The defence has marked a number of contradictions which had not

been adequately considered by the learned High Court Judge which go

to the root of the case.

The victim in her evidence stated that the incident happened around

2 p.m. but in her statement to the police she has stated that this happened

in the night. In her statement to the police she has stated that he was

raped at the .. @oJ@~a) t:i)~@@" after removing her clothes and the

learned High Court Judge has not considered this contradiction per se. In

her evidence she said that she bled after the act of rape but the medical

evidence shows that there were no signs of rape.

For the foregoing reasons I decide to set aside the conviction and

sentence dated 02.03.2017 and proceed to acquit the appellant on the

first count.

4

-- --.---_._---------

Appeal allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Deepali Wijesundera J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

5