CA (PHC) APN 13/2022

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of a Revision under and in

terms of Article 138 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

The Officer-in Charge

Court of Appeal Police Station

Application No: Chilaw.

CA (PHC) APN 0013/2022

Complainant

High Court of Chilaw No.

HCR/11/20 Vs.

MC Chilaw Case No.

2035/18 Hettiarachilage Savinda

Mahamanaweriya,

Rajakadhaluwa.

Accused

AND

Mahamalage Sunali Wathsala

Jeewakumari

Elivitiya

Kumarakattuwa.

Registered-Owner-Claimant

CA (PHC) APN 13/2022

2 | P a g e

1. The Officer-in-Charge

Police Station

Chilaw.

2. The Peoples Leasing Company PLC

No.1161

Maradana Road,

Colombo-07.

Respondents

AND NOW

Mahamalage Sunali Wathsala

Jeewakumari

Elivitiya,

Kumarakattuwa.

Registered-Owner-Claimant-Petitioner

1. The Officer-in-Charge

Police Station

Chilaw.

2. The Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department

Cololbo-12.

3. The Peoples Leasing Company PLC

No.1161

Maradana Road,

Colombo-07.

Respondents-Respondents

AND NOW BETWEEN

CA (PHC) APN 13/2022

3 | P a g e

Mahamalage Sunali Wathsala

Jeewakumari

Elivitiya,

Kumarakattuwa.

Registered-Owner-Claimant-Petitioner-

Petitioner

1. The Officer-in-Charge

Police Station

Chilaw. 2. The Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department

Cololbo-12.

Respondents-Respondents-

Respondents

BEFORE : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

P. Kumararatnam, J.

COUNSEL : Anil Siva, PC with Amaan Bandara for

the Appellant.

Chaturangi Mahawaduge, SC for the

Respondents.

ARGUED ON : 04/09/2023.

DECIDED ON : 04/12/2023.

******************************

CA (PHC) APN 13/2022

4 | P a g e

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The Complainant filed a charge sheet Under Section 63(1) (a) of the

Mines and Minerals Act No.33 of 1992 as amended by Act No.66 of

2009 against the Accused in the Magistrate Court of Chilaw for mining

sand without a valid permit using a JCB Machine bearing Registration

No. NWZA 1783. As the Accused pleaded guilty to the charge sheet, the

Learned Magistrate of Chilaw had convicted the Accused and imposed a

fine of Rs.50,000/- and fixed for an inquiry to confiscate the JCB

Machine bearing No. NWZA 1783.

At the conclusion of the inquiry, the Learned Magistrate had decided to

confiscate the aforesaid machine by his order dated 09.06.2020. At the

inquiry only the Registered Owner-Claimant-Petitioner-Petitioner

(Hereinafter referred to as the Petitioner) had given evidence on her

behalf.

Being aggrieved by the order of the Magistrate, the Appellant filed a

Revision Application in the Provincial High Court of North-Western

Holden at Chilaw to revise the order of the Learned Magistrate of

Chilaw.

After an inquiry, the Learned High Court Judge had dismissed the said

Revision Application of the Petitioner on the basis that the Petitioner

had failed to take necessary precaution to prevent misuse of the afore

said JCB Machine bearing No.NWZA 1783.

CA (PHC) APN 13/2022

5 | P a g e

Now the Petitioner filed this Revision Application in terms of Article

154P of the Constitution to set aside the order of the Learned High

Court Judge of North-Western Holden at Chilaw dated 15/12/2021.

The Appellant submitted following exceptional circumstances:

1. The Petitioner she 34 years old.

2. She and her husband brough this JCB vehicle bearing

Registration No. NW ZA 1783 using all their savings and also

taking a Lease facility from the Peopless Leasing PLC.

3. The monies obtained by renting this JCB vehicle was the only

income the Petitioner had.

4. Therefore, grave and irreparable loss would be caused to the

Petitioner if this JCB vehicle bearing No.NW ZA 1783 is forfeited.

It is settled law that revision is a discretionary remedy, and such power

shall be invoked only upon demonstration of exceptional

circumstances.

In Marian Beebee v. Seyed Mohamed 69 CLW 34 the court held that:

Power of revision is an extraordinary power of the court

which is independent and distinct from the appellate

jurisdiction. The object of revisionary jurisdiction is to ensure

the due administration of justice and the correction of all

errors in order to avoid a miscarriage of justice.

In the case of Rasheed Ali v.Mohammed Ali and Others [1981] 1 SLR

262, the court held that:

the powers of revision vested in the Court of Appeal are

very wide and the Court can in a fit case exercise that power

CA (PHC) APN 13/2022

6 | P a g e

whether or not an appeal lies. When, however, the law does

not give a right of appeal and makes the order final, the

Court of Appeal may nevertheless exercise its powers of

revision, but it should do so only in exceptional

circumstances. Ordinarily the Court will not interfere by way

of review, particularly when the law has expressly given an

aggrieved party an alternative remedy such as the right to

file a separate action, except when non-interference will

cause a denial of justice or irremediable harm.

In Commissioner of Police v. Tanes (1957-58) 68 CLR 383, the court

held that:

"It is a deep-rooted principle of the law that before anyone

can be punished or prejudiced in his person or his property

by any judicial or quasi-judicial procedure, he must be

afforded adequate opportunity of being heard ... "

In this case the Learned High Court Judge only considering the order of

the Magistrate Court of Marawila decided to dismiss the revision

application stating that that the Petitioner had failed to prove that she

did not had knowledge about committing of the offence.

In this case a JCB Machine had been confiscated for mining sand

without a valid permit.

Although, the Petitioner set out several grounds regarding the

interpretation of a machine as in the chargesheet, the Learned

Presidents Counsel has not harped this point in view of the recent

Supreme Court decision.

CA (PHC) APN 13/2022

7 | P a g e

In Hettiarachchige Anton Sujeewa Perera v The Attorney General

SC Appeal No. 101/2012 decided on 05.06.2023, His Lordship

Priyantha Jayawardena PC, J held that:

Furthermore, a stated above, Section 63B (1) has conferred power

on the learned Magistrate to forfeit to the State any mineral,

machinery, equipment or material used in or in connection with the

commission of an offence under the Act. Moreover, as the

transportation of minerals without a valid license issued under the

Act is an offence under the said Act, the equipment used to

transport minerals falls within the scope of section 63B (1). In this

regard, it is pertinent to note that any machinery, equipment or

material used not only directly for exploration of mining but also

anything that would facilitate mining and transportation are

subject to the scope of the said section.

Thus, having considered the aforesaid dictionary meaning and the

context where the word equipment is used in the Mines and

Minerals Act, I am of the opinion that the word equipment used in

the Act should be taken to include a vehicle (Lorry, tipper or even

a bullock cart) used to transport minerals without a valid license

issued under the said Act.

Hence, The JCB No. NWZA-1783 also falls in the category of vehicle.

The Learned Magistrate has dismissed the application on the basis that

the Petitioner had failed to show that she took all necessary precautions

to prevent a crime being committed.

The Learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioner has submitted that

the evidence led at the vehicle inquiry had disclosed that the Appellant

had no knowledge of commission of the offence.

CA (PHC) APN 13/2022

8 | P a g e

In Manawadu V. The Attorney General (1987) 2 SLR 30, it was held

that:

"By Section 7 of Act No. 13 of 1981? it was not intended to deprive

an owner, of his vehicle used by the offender; in committing a

'forest offence' without his (owner's) knowledge and without his

participation. The word 'forfeited' must be given the meaning 'liable

t:) be forfeited' so as to avoid the injustice that would flow on the

construction that forfeiture of the vehicle is automatic on the

conviction of the accused. The amended sub-section 40 does not

exclude by necessary implication 'he rule of 'audi alteram partem' .

The owner of the lorry not a party to' the case is entitled to be

heard on the question of forfeiture of the lorry, if he satisfies the

court that the accused committed the offence without his

lt710wledge or participation, his lorry will not be liable to forfeiture.

The Magistrate must hear the owner of the lorry on the question of

showing cause why the lorry is not liable to be forfeited. If the

Magistrate is satisfied with the cause shown, he must restore the

lorry to the owner. The Magistrate may consider the question of

releasing the lorry to the owner pending inquiry, on his entering

into a bond with sufficient security to abide by the order that may

ultimately be binding on him"

The Petitioner has given evidence in the court and has claimed that she

was unaware of the crime being committed as she has given the vehicle

on rent to excavate a dich to bury broken floor tiles and other dusty

items from an abandoned tile factory. The first day she had gone to the

abandoned factory with her husband to inspect the work. On the

second day when a dich was excavated to put all broken tiles and other

CA (PHC) APN 13/2022

9 | P a g e

items to bury, the police had taken the JCB along with the driver on the

allegation of mining sand.

In this case the Petitioner, further had given evidence and explained to

the Court that she had taken all the possible and necessary

precautions to prevent the vehicle being used for illegal purposes. The

vehicle was not used for any illegal activities by the driver at any stage.

According to the evidence of the Petitioner she had given instructions

not to use for illegal activities. She has placed full trust on the driver

when she gave the vehicle to him. Hence, it is not correct to say that the

Petitioner had not taken any action to prevent the vehicle being used for

illegal purposes.

The Learned Magistrate should have considered that there had been no

previous or pending case against in respect of the vehicle that had been

used for illegal activities and the accused is not a habitual offender.

In this case the Learned High Court Judge only considering the order of

the Magistrate Court of Chilaw and decided to dismiss the revision

application stating that that the Petitioner had failed establish to

establish that she did not have any knowledge of committing the

offence.

It is apparent that in the absence of the Petitioner having had

knowledge of the transportation of timber and /or having had any

monetary or personal benefit from the crime committed cannot be

deemed as the person behind the illegal operation.

Hence, the Learned Magistrate simply dismissing the application on the

basis that the Petitioner had failed to show that she took all necessary

precautions to prevent a crime being committed is not correct in this

case.

Hence, I set aside the order of the Learned High Court Judge of Chilaw

dated 15.12.2021 and the order of Learned Magistrate Court of Chilaw

dated 09.06. 2020.

CA (PHC) APN 13/2022

10 | P a g e

Therefore, this appeal is allowed.

I direct that the vehicle No. NWZA-1783 be released to the Petitioner.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this Judgment to the

High Court of Chilaw.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL