IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Francis Senerath,

Dedduwawala,

Nakulugamuwa.

2nd Defendant-Appellant

CASE NO: CA/105/1999/F

DC TANGALLE CASE NO: 1678/P

Vs.

Jasin Senerath,

Dedduwawala,

Nakulugamuwa.

Plaintiff-Respondent

Liyanagamage Don Gimarahamy,

Dedduwawala,

Nakulugamuwa.

1st Defendant-Respondent

And Several Other Defendant-

Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Anuruddha Dharmaratne for the 2nd

Defendant-Appellant.

2

Hirosha Munasinghe for the Substituted 4th

Plaintiff-Respondent.

22nd and 23rd Respondents are absent and

unrepresented. (No submissions-oral or

written-were made on their behalf.)

Decided on: 25.06.2019

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff filed this action in the District Court seeking to

partition the land described in the schedule to the plaint among

the plaintiff and the 1st-16th defendants. Several parties were

later added as defendants. All the defendants, except the 22nd

and 23rd, accepted the pedigree of the plaintiff. After trial the

learned District Judge accepted the pedigree of the 22nd and 23rd

defendants and ordered to partition the land accordingly. Being

dissatisfied with this Judgment, only the 2nd defendant has

preferred this appeal.

The learned counsel for the 2nd defendant-appellant (appellant)

in his written submissions dated 10.10.2018 challenges the said

Judgment mainly on three grounds.

Firstly, the learned counsel states that the learned District

Judge has failed to identify the corpus. The learned District

Judge in his Judgment has identified the land to be partitioned

as Lot 1 of the Preliminary Plan marked X at the trial. The

contention of the learned counsel is that, in addition to Lot 1,

Lot 3 shall also form part of the corpus. Without wasting time, I

3

must straightaway say that the appellant in his evidence has in

no uncertain terms stated that the land to be partitioned is only

Lot 1 of the Preliminary Plan1, and the rest of the Lots were

acquired by the State.2 The appellant has informed this to the

Court Commissioner at the preliminary survey as well.3 Hence I

have no difficulty in rejecting that argument.

Secondly, the learned counsel states that the learned District

Judge in the Judgment has answered wrong issues. I do not

think so. The learned Judge in the Judgment has stated that

five issues were raised at the trial. By reading the Judgment, it

appears to me that the learned Judge has referred to issues

which were raised on 06.03.19844 and 02.10.19855. However

when I read the Judgment it is clear that the affirmative answer

given to issue No.2 is either a typographical mistake or a

momentary lapse on the part of the Judge.

I must stress at this juncture that there is a misconception that

judgment shall necessarily be understood by reading issues and

answers only. But it is not so. When answering issues in a case

at a stretch by a trial Judge, momentary lapses on the part of

the Judge might occur. Those are innocuous human errors as

Judges are also humans. Those lapses should not vitiate the

judgment unless they go to the root of the case. As observed by

Justice Edussuriya in the Supreme Court case of Udugamkorale

v. Mary Nona [2003] 2 Sri LR 7 at page 9: the answers to issues

1 Vide lines 11-13 from the top of page 101 of the Brief and lines 12-14 from the bottom of page 103 of the Brief. 2 Vide lines 10-12 from the bottom of page 100 of the Brief. 3 Vide page 136 of the Brief under Lot 3. 4 Vide page 92 of the Brief. 5 Vide overleaf of page 96 of the Brief.

4

in a judgment are almost always monosyllabic and are a follow

up on the matters in issues discussed, dealt with and decided in

the body of the judgment. Hence the decision of the case must be

arrived at by a careful reading of the body of the judgment and

not on a superficial reading of the answers to the issues.

The learned District Judge in the Judgment has clearly stated

his conclusions and at page 4 of the Judgment has given the

calculation of undivided rights of the parties as well.

Hence I am not inclined to accept the second argument.

Thirdly, the learned counsel says that the learned District Judge

erred in accepting the version of the contesting defendants in

preference to that of the plaintiff on the question of the original

owner of the land.

The main contest in respect of the pedigree was whether the

original owner of the corpus was Davith Appuhamy as pleaded

by the plaintiff or Juwan Appuhamy as pleaded by the

contesting defendants. The District Judge accepted the latter

one as the more probable one. In coming to that conclusion, the

learned Judge has given more weight to the first deed of the

plaintiff marked P1, which laid the foundation of the plaintiffs

pedigree. The plaintiff produced that deed on the basis that

Loku Hamine who was the wife of the Davith Appuhamy

transferred her share inherited on account of marriage from

Davith Appuhamy to Don Seeman.6 The same was suggested by

learned counsel for the appellant during the cross-examination

6 Vide overleaf of page 92 of the Brief.

5

of the 22A defendant.7 The learned District Judge, having

perused the deed P1, has stated in the Judgment that the said

assertion is incorrect and the transferor of that deed is not Loku

Hamine but Davith Appuhamy himself who has derived title by

two deeds mentioned therein and therefore the contention of the

plaintiff that Davith Appuhamy is the original owner of the land

is unacceptable.

Upon the death of the original 22nd defendant, her son-the 22A

defendant aged 60 and the 23rd defendant aged 82, have given

evidence at the trial and explained the extended pedigree. Their

position is that Davith Appuhamy was a child of Punchi Hamine

who was a child of Juwan Appuhamy-one time the original

owner of the land.

In the facts and circumstances of this case, the District Judge

cannot be found fault with accepting the version of the

contesting defendants as the more probable one.

At the trial, the learned counsel for the appellant has not raised

separate issues but stated that the appellant accepts the

pedigree of the plaintiff.8

Regarding improvements, the only issue raised by the learned

counsel for the appellant during the course of evidence of the

plaintiff was about the well marked H in Lot 1 of the Preliminary

Plan.9 That issue has been answered in favour of the appellant.

7 Vide overleaf of page 109 of the Brief. 8 Vide page 92 of the Brief. 9 Vide overleaf of page 96 of the Brief.

6

I see no reason to interfere with the Judgment of the District

Court.

Appeal is dismissed without costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal