Page 1 of 5

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal from the

Provincial High Court Holden in

Kalmunai in terms of Section 331 of

the Code of Criminal Procedure Act to

the Court of Appeal.

CA (PHC) 0245/17 Aboobucker Sabir,

Provincial High Court of Kalmunai No. 96/4, Ampara 11th Road,

Case No. EP/HCK/Rev/200/2017 Sammanthurai.

COMPLAINANT

Magistrates Court of Sammanthurai Vs.

Case No. 8241/PVT/13 Sinnarasa Aboothahir Alias Janeer,

No. 352/6, Block J, East-01,

Hira Junction, Sammanthurai.

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

Aboobucker Sabir,

No. 96/4, Ampara 11th Road,

Sammanthurai. COMPLAINANT-PETITIONER-

APPELLANT

Page 2 of 5

Vs.

1. Sinnarasa Aboothahir Alias

Janeer,

No. 352/6, Block J, East-01,

Hira Junction, Sammanthurai.

ACCUSED-RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENT

2. The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT

Before : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

: P. Kumararatnam, J.

Counsel : A. Mohammed Farook for the complainant-petitioner-

Appellant

: Shihar Hassan for the accused-respondent-

respondent

: Nishanth Nagaratnam, S.C. for the respondent-

respondent

Argued on : 05-06-2023

Decided on : 27-07-2023

Page 3 of 5

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

The complainant-petitioner-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the appellant)

instituted proceedings against the accused-respondent-respondent (hereinafter

referred to as the respondent) by filing a private plaint in terms of section 136(1)

of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No 15 of 1979 before the Magistrate Court

of Sammanthurai.

The charge preferred against the respondent was that he assaulted one Sabir

Fathima Nusaifa on her head and the hip, and pulled her ear on 24-02-2013,

and thereby committed offences punishable in terms of sections 314 and 343 of

the Penal Code.

Despite the obvious defects in the charge where the appellant has mentioned two

penal offences in one charge, the learned Magistrate of Sammanthurai has

decided to issue summons to the respondent. As the respondent has pleaded not

guilty to the charge, the matter has proceeded to trial.

At the trial, the alleged victim of the attack has given evidence as PW-02, and it

had been her evidence that the respondent who was her uncle, never assaulted

her as claimed by the appellant and no such incident as claimed occurred. Even

the PW-03 who is the younger sister of the of the alleged victim, has said the

same thing in her evidence.

The learned Magistrate of Sammanthurai pronouncing his judgment on 09-

092016 has very correctly acquitted the respondent as there was no evidence

whatsoever against the respondent to prove the charge against him.

The appellant has filed an application in revision in terms of Article 154P of the

Constitution before the Provincial High Court of the Eastern Province holden at

Kalmunai on the basis of being aggrieved by the said judgment of the learned

Magistrate of Sammanthurai.

Page 4 of 5

After hearing the parties, the learned High Court Judge of Kalmunai by his well

reasoned out judgment dated 30th August 2017, has dismissed the revision

application for want of any merit.

It is against the said judgment the appellant has preferred this appeal.

The Grounds of Appeal

At the hearing of this appeal, the learned Counsel for the appellant formulated

the following grounds of appeal for the consideration of the Court.

(1) The learned Magistrate and the learned High Court Judge erred in law

by failing to consider the evidence of the appellant recorded at page 99

of the appeal brief.

(2) The learned Magistrate and the learned High Court Judge failed to

consider the evidence as per the section 114 of the Evidence

Ordinance.

It was the position of the learned Counsel for the appellant that the evidence

given by the appellant, who gave evidence as PW-01, before the learned

Magistrate has not been considered and if considered in the correct perspective,

there should be a conviction of the respondent. It was also his position that the

evidence of the appellant should have been considered in terms of section 114 of

the Evidence Ordinance, where the Court may presume the existence of certain

facts.

It was the contention of the learned Counsel for the respondent that the appellant

was not a person who has witnessed the incidents alleged by him in the plaint

filed against the respondent, and whatever he has stated about the alleged

incident in his evidence amounts to hearsay, and a conviction cannot be entered

based on hearsay. The learned Counsel moved for the dismissal of the appeal.

Page 5 of 5

Consideration of the Grounds of Appeal

It is abundantly clear from the proceedings before the learned Magistrate of

Sammanthurai that the appellant has failed to adduce any evidence to prove the

charge or charges preferred by him against the respondent by way of a private

plaint. Under the circumstances, there was no option for the learned Magistrate,

but to acquit the respondent.

It is also abundantly clear that the appellant had no basis to challenge the

judgment when he filed the application in revision before the Provincial High

Court. The learned High Court Judge has well considered the factual and legal

provisions in that regard, and had correctly dismissed the application.

Accordingly, I find no reasons to interfere with the judgment of the learned

Magistrate of Samanthurai as well as the judgment of the learned High Court

Judge of the Provincial High Court of Eastern Province holden at Kalmunai.

It is the view of this Court that the appellant has filed this appeal before this

Court, not for anything else, but to cause the maximum possible harassment to

the respondent, knowing very well the strength of his appeal.

The appeal is dismissed as it is devoid of any merit.

The Registrar of the Court is directed to communicate this judgment to the High

Court of Kalmunai and to the Magistrate Court of Sammanthurai for information.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal