Page 1 of 9

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application under and in

terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka for

mandates in the nature of Writs of Mandamus.

Environmental Foundation (Guarantee)

Limited

3A, 1st Lane,

Kirulapona,

Colombo 05.

PETITIONER

CA WRIT No: 463/20

Vs.

1. Hon. Douglas Devananda,

Minister of Fisheries,

Ministry of Fisheries,

Maligawatte Road,

Colombo 10.

2. Hon. Kanchana Wijesekara,

State Minister of Ornamental Fish, Inland

Fish and Prawn Farming,

Fishery Harbour Development,

Multiday Fishing Activities and Fish

Exports,

New Secretariat,

Maligawatte, Colombo 10.,

Page 2 of 9

2.(a) Hon. Deenagama Vitharanage

Chanaka Dinushan,

State Minister of Fisheries,

New Secretariat,

Maligawatte,

Colombo 10.

2.(b) Hon Piyal Nishantha De Silva,

State Minister of Fisheries, New

Secretariat,

Maligawatte, Colombo 10.

3. Mr. S.J. Kahawatta,

Director General,

Department of Fisheries and Aquatic

Resources,

New Secretariat,

Maligawatte, Colombo 10.

4. Mrs. R.M.I. Rathnayake,

Secretary to the Ministry of Fisheries,

Ministry of Fisheries,

Maligawatte Road, Colombo 10.

5. Professor A. Navaratnerajah,

Chairman,

National Aquatic Resources Research and

Development Agency,

Crow Island,

Colombo 15.

5.(a). Professor M.J.S. Wijeyaratne,

Chairman,

National Aquatic Resource Research and

Development Agency,

Page 3 of 9

Crow Island,

Colombo 15.

6. Maj. Gen. S.W.L. Daulagala (Rtd) RSP

VSV USP,

Chairman,

Ceylon Fisheries Corporation,

P.O. Box.1384, Rock House Lane,

Mutwal, Colombo 15.

6.(a). Mr. Chathuranga Udawatte,

Chairman,

Ceylon Fisheries Corporation,

P.O. Box. 1384, Rock House Lane,

Mutwal,

Colombo 15.

7. Capt. Nihal Kappetipola,

Chairman,

Ceylon Fishery Harbours Corporation,

No 15, Rock House Lane,

Colombo 15.

8. Dr. Anil Jasingha,

Secretary,

Ministry of Environment and Wildlife

Resources,

Sobadam Piyasa, 416/C/1,

Robert Gunawardana Mawatha,

Battaramulla,

9. Mr. B.K. Prabhath Chandrakeerthi,

Director General,

Coast Conservation and Coastal Resource

Management Department,

Page 4 of 9

4th Floor, Ministry of Fisheries Building,

New Secretariat,

Maligawatta,

Maradana, Colombo 10.

9.(a) Dr. M.M.S.S.B.Yalegama,

Director General,

Coast Conservation and Coastal Resource

Management Department,

4th Floor, Ministry of Fisheries Building,

New Secretariat,

Maligawatta, Maradana, Colombo 10.

9.(b). Mr. R.A.S.Ranawaka,

Director General,

Coast Conservation and Coastal Resource

Management Department,

4th Floor, Ministry of Fisheries Building,

New Secretariat,

Maligawatta, Maradana, Colombo 10.

10. Mr. Jayantha Wijeratne,

Chairman,

National Aquaculture Development

Authority of Sri Lanka, No. 41/1. New

Parliament Rd,

Pelawatte, Battaramulla.

11. Rear Admiral Samantha Wimalatunga,

Director General,

Department of Coast Guard,

Sri Lanka Coast Guard Headquarters,

SLCG Rohana , Udupila, Mirissa, Matara.

Page 5 of 9

11.(a)Rear Admiral G. E. W. M. A. N.

Ekanayake,

Director General,

Department of Coast Guard,

Sri Lanka Coast Guard Headquarters,

SLCG Rohana , Udupila, Mirissa, Matara.

12. Mr, Siripala Amarasinghe,

Chairman,

Central Environmental Authority, 104,

Denzil Kobbekaduwa Mawatha,

Battaramulla.

13. Mrs. H.M.S. Herath,

Divisional Secretary,

Divisional Secretariat,

Puttalam.

13.(a). Mr. S.A.Y.R. Jayathilake,

Divisional Secretary,

Divisional Secretariat, Puttalam.

RESPONDENTS

Before: D.N. Samarakoon, J.

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Counsel: Geoffrey Alagaratnam PC, with Dhanushan Kaneshayogan, Andrew Keshav

and Supuni Gunasekera instructed by Lakni Silva for the Petitioner

Vikum de Abrew PC, ASG with Rajitha Aluwihare SC for the Respondents

Written 15.11.2022(by the Petitioner)

Submissions: 15.11.2022(by the Respondents)

On

Page 6 of 9

Argued On : 28.09.2022

Decided On : 13.12.2022

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

The instant application is filed in the public interest by the Petitioner

Organisation, Environmental Foundation (Guarantee) Limited, to invoke this Courts

Writ jurisdiction to compel the 2nd Respondent and/or any one or more of the Respondents,

by way of a Writ of Mandamus, to fully implement the provisions of the Fisheries and

Aquatic Resources Act No. 2 of 1996, as amended, which prohibits the practice of bottom

trawling, and to prosecute those engaging in such unlawful practice. The application is

filed particularly concerning the damage and destruction this practice is causing in the

Puttalam Estuary.

The practice of bottom trawling is a method of fishing that involves using a large net

with heavy weights, dragged across the bed of the water body. This practice was outlawed

by the Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (Amendment) Act No. 11 of 2017, an amendment

to the aforesaid principal Fisheries and Aquatic Resources Act, because of the harmful

impact of this destructive practice. The destruction that is caused by this unsustainable

method of fishing to the environment and the livelihoods of small-scale fishermen is well

documented both locally and internationally. Section 28A, which was inserted in the

principal enactment by the Amendment Act of 2017, reads:

(1) (a) No person shall engage in or cause any other person to be engaged in fishing operations

utilizing bottom trawl nets, including nets with or without two wings or using vertical poles

at the two free ends of the net, to be towed by motorized or mechanized fishing boats.

(b) No person shall use, possess, import, transport, purchase or sell any bottom trawl net,

to be towed by a motorized or mechanized fishing boat for the purpose of carrying out

fishing operations in Sri Lanka Waters. [emphasis added]

The Amendment Act creates a new offence by the insertion of subsection (2AA) to

Section 49 of the principal enactment. This Section provides that, any person who

contravenes or fails to comply with the provisions of Section 28A of this Act shall be guilty

of an offence and shall on conviction after summary trial before a Magistrate, be liable to

imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or to a fine, not less than fifty thousand

Page 7 of 9

rupees. Both parties, in their respective submissions, are in complete agreement that this

method of fishing is destructive.

The Petitioner Organisations contention is that, from the data available to them

and enumerated in the Petition, there are twenty-three boats that are engaged in this

illegal practice in the Puttalam Estuary, despite the ban. This is confirmed by the

response to the Petitioner Organisations right-to-information request. The response

letter (X26) issued under the hand of one Assistant Director, Puttalam of the

Department of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources states that at the time the right to

information request was made in 2018, there were twenty-three trawling boats operating

in the Puttalam District. The Petitioner Organisation alleges that this practice is

continuing unabated, with no discernible action taken by the Respondents to eradicate it

and penalise those engaging in it. This alleged inaction is notwithstanding numerous

letters that have been written to the Respondents by local fishermen, and continuous

requests made by the Petitioner Organisation itself calling the attention of the relevant

authorities to this illegal practice, all of which are attached to the Petition.

On the other hand, the Respondents contend that no licences to engage in bottom

trawling have been issued since the proscription of the practice and that licences have

only been issued for trawling nets used for mid-water prawn fishing operations carried

out by non-motorized or non-mechanized boats. Therefore, it is contended that the relief

prayed for has been implemented. The Respondents have annexed an affidavit (R5) of

the Secretary of the One-Day, Multi-Day Trawling Operators Fisheries Cooperative

Society Ltd, Kalpitiya. The Secretary affirms that there are twenty-three boats that

engaged in bottom trawling (listed in R5a), and consequent to the ban of this practice in

2017, this practice no longer takes place. Further, it is affirmed that licences to engage in

bottom trawling had not been issued in respect of those twenty-three boats since 2011.

(This, as explained in the Statement of Objections of the Respondents, is a result of a

policy decision of the Department of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (R3) taken in 2011,

based on the recommendations of the National Aquatic Resources and Development

Agency (R2)). The relevant portion of the affidavit (R5) reads:

(23) fg%d,sx

Page 8 of 9

. 01 .

2017 11

fg%d,sx .

2011 jIfha 01 hd;%d fg%d,sx

.

01

fg%d,sx .

Nonetheless, the Petitioner Organisation submits that the Respondents have not

submitted any documents or other material to substantiate their claim that this practice

no longer takes place. No steps have been taken in the least to remove, seize or confiscate

the bottom trawl nets installed on those boats, or to prosecute those engaging in it after

its proscription, and instead, the Respondents have annexed an affidavit of the Secretary

of the One-Day, Multi-Day Trawling Operators Fisheries Cooperative Society Ltd,

Kalpitiya, whom himself owns and operates two of the twenty-three boats. It is alleged

that this practice continues. To substantiate this the Petitioner Organisations counter

objections annexes affidavits of two individuals associated with Fishermens Cooperative

Societies (H1 and H2), with photographs of the vessels.

The role of a Writ of Mandamus, as explained in De Smiths, Judicial Review

(Eighth edition) on page 890, is to enforce the exercise of statutory duties and discretion

in accordance with the law. The conditions that must be satisfied for a Writ of Mandamus

to issue were set out in the case of Credit Information Bureau of Sri Lanka v. Messrs

Jafferjee & Jafferjee [2005] 1 SLR 89.

In the instant application, we are unable to issue a Writ of Mandamus. This is

because a Writ of Mandamus does not lie when there are facts in dispute (Vide Thajudeen

v. Sri Lanka Tea Board [1981] 2 SLR 471, approved in Dr. Puvanendran v. Premasiri

[2009] 2 SLR 107). Whilst the Respondents contend that they have complied with the law

and not issued or renewed licences since the prohibition of bottom trawling for

mechanized or motorized boats, the Petitioner Organisation contends that this practice

continues. There is contradictory material that is before us, which does not help us

Page 9 of 9

conclude whether the practice is still undertaken. Therefore, we are not able to judge

which version is correct.

Having said that, given the important environmental interests at stake, especially

the adverse effects caused by the practice of bottom trawling if the practice is continuing,

we direct the Department of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources, along with the other

relevant authorities to inquire into and identify whether the motorized or mechanized

fishing boats, not limited to the twenty-three boats listed in the Petition, in the Puttalam

Estuary are engaging in the practice of bottom trawling; to inquire into and identify

whether the motorized and mechanized fishing boats continue to use or possess bottom

trawl nets; if it is found that such boats are engaging in bottom trawling or continue to

use or possess bottom trawl nets, then take steps in terms of Section 49 (2AA) of the Act

against those refusing to comply with the law.

Before we conclude, we must note that the Respondent has objected to this

application on the ground that the owners of the twenty-three boats are not before this

Court, and that any order made adverse to their interests will cause an injustice to them.

However, since we are not issuing a Writ of Mandamus, but merely instructing the

relevant officials to conduct an inquiry and determine whether in fact this illegal practice

of bottom trawling is carried out it cannot be said that an injustice would occasion. This

is because if they are not engaging in the practice of bottom trawling they can defend

themselves at such inquiry.

This application is dismissed, subject to the aforesaid direction of this Court. We

make no order for costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. N. SAMARAKOON, J.

I AGREE

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL