IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. NO. 25/2011

HC Badulla No. 219/2003

1

1. Dissanayake

Karunaratne

Mudiyanselage

No. 08, RubbenNatte

Maduganthalawa, Passara.

2. Dissanayake Mudisyanselage

Piyasena

Mullekumbura, Maduganthalawa,

Passara.

ACCUSED - APPELLANTS

Vs

Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENT

I

!1t I

IIII

i

t . $ I I I I ! I I ! I I I I t I I I I I I r I I

i I I I (

BEFORE : Deepali Wijesundera J.

: L. U. Jayasuriya J.

COUNSEL : Kumar Dunusinghe for the

Accused Appellants

Kapila Waidyaratne ASG with

P. Kumararatnam DSG for the

Attorney General

ARGUED ON : 17th January, 2017

DECIDED ON : 28th February, 2017

Oeepali Wijesundera J.

The first and second accused appellants were indicted in the High

Court of Badulla for the murder of a person named Aththanayake

Mudiyanselage Appuhamy on the 09th of August 1998 under sec. 296 read

with sec. 32 of the Penal Code and was convicted and sentenced to death

on the 07th of June 2011.

The story of the prosecution was that on the day in question, the

deceased has gone for his usual stroll on his land and to the anicut to have

a bath. The two sons of the deceased the first and second prosecution

witness have heard the father shouting "~ ej!@@@5 :) 6@~)" and

2

~

~ 1 l

~ i I I I I I I i I ! ! I

I I !

I I I I

rushed to where the cries came from. They have seen the first and second

accused appellants lifting the deceased from the stream where he went to

have the bath. They watched them carrying him and dumping him under a

kandha tree, and run. The deceased, had been breathing when they found

him with a slit on his throat. They have carried him home and have run to

get help to take him to hospital. But he has been dead by that time. The

motive for the killing had been a land dispute. This has been established

by the police witness C.1. Gamanpila the inquiring officer. The judgment in

the land case was delivered on following day in favour of the deceased.

The argument taken up by the learned counsel for the appellant was

that there were two unidentified persons at the scene, and that the weapon

said to have killed the deceased was not shown to the Judicial Medical

Officer. The inquiring officer has stated that a sharp tool (~) was found

near the scene of the crime but there were no blood stains on it. The

counsel mentioned two contradictions in the evidence marked as V1 and

V2. These two contradictions do not cast a doubt on the evidence of the

two eye witness.

The counsel for the appellant argued that the learned High Court

Judge has not considered lesser culpability and moved that they be

convicted for the lesser offence under sec. 297 of the Penal Code. Both

3

\

IIIIIIi! iI

i

II

II

lIt1i

~

~tI

i

1,

f

t,

accused in their dock statements have denied the incident and pleaded

they were unaware of the incident. Therefore now they can not plea for a

lesser offence in the appeal.

The accused appellants have run after dumping the deceased under

the kandha tree when the second witness Chandradasa flashed his torch

on them this subsequent conduct of the accused appellants proves the

prosecution evidence, on intention. The fact that the appellants were seen

carrying the injured deceased shows that it was not a spur of the moment

incident.

The learned High Court Judge has carefully analysed the evidence

placed before the High Court. The appellants have totally denied the

incident in their dock statements therefore the learned High Court Judge

can not consider a conviction for a lesser offence. In the instant appeal

they moved for a conviction for a lesser offence which they can not do after

denying knowledge of the incident.

For the above reasons the arguments of the accused appellant fail.

Therefore I see no reason to set aside a well considered judgment.

4

The judgment and conviction of the High Court of Badulla delivered

on 07/06/2011 is affirmed.

Appeal is dismiss.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

L.U. Jayasuriya J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

5