==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/BOR/0001/2023

Page 1 of 23

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal filed in terms of Section 28 (1) of Land Acquisition Act against the order dated 16/11/2022 given by the Land Acquisition Board of Review in Appeal No: BR/2822008/CL

1. I. S. Thotahewa,

No.66 Madinnagoda Road, Rajagiriya. 2. Appu Hennadi Totahewage

Dawson Silva, No.66 Madinnagoda Road, Rajagiriya. (Now Deceased)

Petitioners Vs.

Acquiring Officer, Divisional Secretary, Divisional Secretariat Sri Jayawardenapura Mawatha, No. 341/2 Kotte Road, Rajagiriya.

Respondent AND THEN

1. I. S. Thotahewa,

No.66 Madinnagoda Road, Rajagiriya.

CA Case No: CA/BOR/0001/2023 CA/Land/Acq./ Land/Acquisition Board of Review No. BR/282/2008/CL

CA/BOR/0001/2023

Page 2 of 23

1st Petitioner-Appellant Vs.

1. Mandadige Dharimi Swarnamali

Silva (nee) Fernando, No.66 Madinnagoda Road, Rajagiriya. (Now Deceased) 2. Appu Hennedi Dilhan Nandika

Totahewage, also knowns as Dilhan Nandika Totahewa No.66 Madinnagoda Road, Rajagiriya. 3. Appu Hennadi Ranga Ravinath Totahewa, (Appeared via Power of Attorney of Appu Hennedi Dilhan Nandika Totahewage). All at No.66, Madinnagoda Road, Rajagiriya. 4. I. S. Thotahewa,

No.66, Madinnagoda Road, Rajagiriya.

1st-4th Substituted-Petitioner-Appellants Vs.

Acquiring Officer, Divisional Secretary, Divisional Secretariat Sri Jayawardenapura Mawatha, No. 341/2 Kotte Road, Rajagiriya

Respondent-Respondent

CA/BOR/0001/2023

Page 3 of 23

AND THEN BETWEEN IN THE LAND ACQUISITION BOARD OF REVIEW

1. I. S. Thotahewa,

No.66 Madinnagoda Road, Rajagiriya.

1st Petitioner-Appellant

Vs.

1. Mandadige Dharimi Swarnamali

Silva (nee) Fernando, No.66 Madinnagoda Road, Rajagiriya. (Now Deceased) 2. Appu Hennedi Dilhan Nandika

Totahewage, also knowns as Dilhan Nandika Totahewa No.66 Madinnagoda Road, Rajagiriya. 3. Appu Hennadi Ranga Ravinath Totahewa, (Appeared via Power of Attorney of Appu Hennedi Dilhan Nandika Totahewage). All at No.66, Madinnagoda Road, Rajagiriya. 4. I. S. Thotahewa,

No.66, Madinnagoda Road, Rajagiriya. (Appeared via Power of Attorney of Appu Hennedi Dilhan Nandika Totahewage).

1st-4th Substituted-Petitioner-Appellants Vs.

CA/BOR/0001/2023

Page 4 of 23

Acquiring Officer, Divisional Secretary, Divisional Secretariat Sri Jayawardenapura Mawatha, No. 341/2 Kotte Road, Rajagiriya

Respondent-Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. I. S. Thotahewa,

No.66 Madinnagoda Road, Rajagiriya. (Appeared via Power of Attorney of Appu Hennedi Dilhan Nandika Totahewage)

1st Petitioner-Appellant-Appellant

1. Mandadige Dharimi Swarnamali

Silva (nee) Fernando, No.66 Madinnagoda Road, Rajagiriya. (Now Deceased) 2. Appu Hennedi Dilhan Nandika

Totahewage, also knowns as Dilhan Nandika Totahewa No.66 Madinnagoda Road, Rajagiriya. 3. Appu Hennadi Ranga Ravinath Totahewa, (Appeared via Power of Attorney of Appu Hennedi Dilhan Nandika Totahewage). No.66, Madinnagoda Road, Rajagiriya. 4. I. S. Thotahewa,

No.66, Madinnagoda Road,

CA/BOR/0001/2023

Page 5 of 23

Rajagiriya. (Appeared via Power of Attorney of Appu Hennedi Dilhan Nandika Totahewage).

1st-4th Substituted-Petitioner-Appellant-Appellants

Vs.

Acquiring Officer, Divisional Secretary, Divisional Secretariat Sri Jayawardenapura Mawatha, No. 341/2 Kotte Road, Rajagiriya

Respondent-Respondent-Respondent Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J. K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J. Counsel : Shamalie de Silva with Sandun Batagoda

and Shabnam Mohamed instructed by W. M. D. M. B. Wasala for the 1st Petitioner-Appellant-Appellant and 1st to 4th Substituted-Petitioner-Appellant-Appellants. Mihiri de Alwis, SSC for the Respondent-Respondent-Respondent. Argued on : 04.08.2025 Written Submissions of the Petitioner-Appellant- Appellants tendered on : 13.05.2024 Written Submissions of the Respondent-Respondent

CA/BOR/0001/2023

Page 6 of 23

-Respondent tendered on : 01.11.2024 Decided on : 20.02.2026 K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J. Instant appeal arises from an order dated 16.11.2022 made by the Land

Acquisition Board of Review (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the LABR’) a

copy of which was annexed to the petition of appeal marked as ‘X’ (hereinafter

called and referred to as ‘the Order of LABR’) in the exercise of its appellate

jurisdiction vested in it by part III of the Land Acquisition Act No. 9 of 1950 as

amended (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Act’) in respect of an appeal

preferred to it under and in terms of section 22 of the Act by the 1st Petitioner-

Appellant-Appellant and the 2nd Petitioner-Appellant-Appellant who had died

during the pendency of the proceedings and in whose place, the Substituted 1st

to 4th Petitioner-Appellants-Appellants had subsequently, been substituted

(hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the 1st and the 2nd Appellants’) on the

ground that the amount of compensation so determined and awarded to them

by the Acquiring Officer/Divisional Secretary who has been named as the

Respondent-Respondent-Respondent in the petition of appeal (hereinafter called

and referred to as ‘the Respondent’) under and in terms of the provisions of

section 17 of the Act for the acquisition of a plot of Marshy land for a public

purpose which is called and known as ‘Kosgahaliyadda’ and ‘Yakbaddakumbura’

and as morefully, described as Lot 1 in the Plan bearing No. මු.පි.ක ො.6787

prepared by the Surveyor General and containing 0.4099 Hectares in extent

(hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the land intended to be acquired’) in

pursuant to an inquiry held by the Respondent under the provisions of the Act

in terms of the notice dated 25.04.1989, published by him in the Gazette of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka bearing No. 555/5 and dated

25.04.1989 (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Gazette’ ) a copy of which

was annexed to the petition of appeal marked as ‘A2’, is insufficient wherein,

LABR had increased the amount of compensation by increasing its perch value

from Rs. 4500/- as determined by the Respondent to Rs. 6000/- and the total

CA/BOR/0001/2023

Page 7 of 23

value accordingly, that was so determined and awarded by the Respondent. It is

this order of the LABR that the Appellants now, seek to canvas before us in the

instant appeal on the grounds of appeal urged in paragraph 7(i) to (vii) of the

petition of appeal among any other grounds of appeal that may be urged by the

Counsel before us at the hearing of this appeal, and they may be re-poduced

verbatim the same as follows;

“(i) L.A.B.R has erred in law in evaluating the weight of evidence in

arriving at their Order;

(ii) L.A.B.R has erred in fact and/or law in failing to take into

consideration the evidence led both in terms of past decisions of the

L.A.B.R and sales which are situated within the limits of Kotte Urban

Council and the evidence of the Appellants valuer which

demonstrates that the said sales in the year 1991 and in 1990 and

informed that those sales are useful in arriving at the market value

of the acquired land. (submitted by Appellants as A8). (5th question

and answer at Pg.9 of the proceeding on 15/12/2011) which

demonstrates market value under Section 45 of the Land

Acquisition Act;

(iii) L.A.B.R has erred in law in failing to appreciate that the Market

Value of the Appellants land cannot be correctly derived by

assessing the compensation based on a valuation used for lands

acquired under the Colombo District (Low-Lying Areas) Reclamation

And Development Board Act (No. 15 of 1968);

(iv) L.A.B.R erred in law in evaluating the correct market value of the

compensation payable to the Appellants;

(v) L.A.B.R erred in law in failing to evaluate the evidence led by both

the Appellant's value that the acquired land can be developed. (Last

question in Pg. 6 of proceeding on 15/12/2011 and the evidence of

the Respondent's valuer that the land could be filled. (3rd question

CA/BOR/0001/2023

Page 8 of 23

and answer in Pg.8 of proceedings on 07/10/2015 which has a

bearing on the determination of the market value;

(vi) L.A.B.R erred in law in failing to appreciate that as a result of

the failure to publish a notice in terms of Section 38(a) of the Land

Acquisition Act, the Government by the acts of the Respondent has

unjustly enriched themselves;

(vii) L.A.B.R erred in law in taking into consideration a previous

valuation of the Valuation Department (which situated abutting the

land acquired) and was acquired for a sewerage project in

20/04/1983 (CDS/S/LA/394) of where one perch was valued at

Rs.2,698/- per perch. (This is a valuation made by the Valuation

Department six years before 25/04/1989 (the date the acquired

land to be valued)”

As is discernible from a careful scrutiny of the grounds of appeal, the principal

contention advanced by the Appellants is that, the order of LABR with regard to

the assessment of the quantum of compensation awarded to them, is totally,

against the weight of the evidence led before the LABR by both the Appellants as

well as the Respondent through their expert witnesses, namely; Mr. Kaleel-

Valuer, for the Appellants and Ms. Geetha Fernando-Government Valuer for the

Respondent representing the Government Valuation Department, in that it was

contented by the Appellants that had the LABR considered, analyzed and

evaluated the evidence led before it with regard to the assessment of the amount

of compensation to be awarded to them in its totality and in its correct

perspective, it could have valued a perch of the land intended to be acquired by

the Respondent at Rs. 34,500/- and the total amount of compensation to be paid

to the Appellants accordingly, in view of the evidence led before it by way of past

decisions of the LABR and sales which are situated within the limits of the Kotte

Urban Council. The Appellants therefore, urge in prayer ‘b’ of the petition of

appeal that the amount of compensation awarded to them by LABR by increasing

the perch value of the land intended to be acquired by the Respondent from Rs.

CA/BOR/0001/2023

Page 9 of 23

4500/- to Rs. 6000/-, be further increased by increasing the perch value thereof,

to Rs. 34,500/-.

While, totally, denying the contention so advanced by the Appellants at the

hearing of this appeal before us, it was on the other hand, contented by the

Respondent that assessment of quantum of compensation awarded to the

Appellants in its order by the LABR is based on the evidence led before it and

therefore, it can be sustainable both in fact and law and therefore, the appeal

should be dismissed with costs.

It is in this context, let me now, briefly, set out the facts relevant to the instant

appeal.

Pursuant to a notice published by the Respondent in the Gazette (A2/R3) under

section 7 of the Act, the 1st and 2nd Appellants had made their claims for

compensation to the Respondent in respect of the land intended to be acquired

by him thereby, quoting the market value of a perch thereof to be Rs. 120,000/-

at the time of the publication of the notice; that the Respondent, had having held

an inquiry into the claims for compensation under the provisions of the Act,

made a decision under section 17 thereof a copy of which was annexed to the

petition of appeal marked as A4, thereby, determining that the 1st Appellant and

2nd Appellant are entitled to 15.80 perches and 146.19 perches respectively, from

the land intended to be acquired; that accordingly, the amount of compensation

payable to the 1st Appellant and the 2nd Appellant is Rs. 71,201.92/- and

6,58,758.08/- respectively; and that being aggrieved only by that part of the

decision (A4) with regard to the mode of the assessment of compensation, instant

appeal had been preferred to this Court by the 1st and 2nd Appellants praying for

an increase at the rate of Rs. 34,500/- per perch being the market value of the

land intended to be acquired by the Respondent on the date of the publication

in the Gazette, of the notice under section 7 of the Act (A2) namely; 25.04.1989,

of the amount of compensation awarded to each of them by LABR as contained

in his decision of the Respondent (A4).

CA/BOR/0001/2023

Page 10 of 23

It is in this backdrop of the case, let me now, examine the provisions governing

assessment of compensation and the part VI of the Act comprising of sections

45, 46, 46A, 47 and 48, specifically, enact the special provisions with regard to

the assessment of the amount of compensation to be awarded to a person whose

land is subject to the acquisition under the provisions of the Act for a public

purpose and they read thus;

“45.

(1) For the purposes of this Act the market value of a land in respect of

which a notice under section 7 has been published shall, subject as

hereinafter provided, be the amount which the land might be expected to

have realized if sold by a willing seller in the open market as a separate

entity on the date of publication of that notice in the Gazette :

Provided that, in determining that amount, all such returns and

assessments of income from, or of the capital or annual value of, that land

as have been made or acquiesced in by the owner of that land for the

purposes of any rate or tax imposed in respect of that land, shall be taken

into consideration.

(2) For the purposes of this Act the market value of a servitude shall-

(a) where it is a new servitude which is to be created by its

acquisition under this Act, be the amount by which the market value

of the servant tenement of the servitude will be diminished by the

creation of the servitude, or

(b) where it is an existing servitude which is to be extinguished by

the acquisition of the servitude and its servant tenement under this

Act, be the amount by which the market value of the dominant

tenement of the servitude will be diminished by the extinction of the

servitude.

CA/BOR/0001/2023

Page 11 of 23

(3) Where any portion of a land which is to be acquired under this Act is

situated within any street lines or building limit defined by or under any

other written law, the market value of that portion shall be the market

value which that portion would have if it does not fall within such street

lines or building limit :

Provided that the acquiring officer shall, notwithstanding anything in this

Act, tender and make payment of compensation in respect of that portion

of land in the following manner :-

(a) he shall forthwith on the making of an award under section 17

in respect of that portion, pay to the persons entitle to compensation

according to that award in the proportions in which such

compensation has been apportioned to such persons by that award,

cash in an amount equal to-

(i) the market value of such portion of land on March 31, 1978

; or

(ii) the market value of such portion of land on the date on

which the street lines or building limits within which such

portion is situated, were defined, whichever date is later ; and

(b) the difference between the market value of that portion of land

on the date on which a notice under section 7 was published in

respect thereof and the amount paid under paragraph (a) shall be

paid to the persons entitled to compensation according to the award

made under section 17 in the proportions in which such

compensation has been apportioned to such persons by that award,

in the form of Government bonds escapable after ten years and

carrying interest at the current rate of interest payable on medium-

term Government bonds issued by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka.”

CA/BOR/0001/2023

Page 12 of 23

“46.

(1) The amount of compensation to be paid under this Act to any person

interested in a land shall-

(a) where the compensation is for the acquisition of that land, be

based on the market value of that land, or

(b) where the compensation is for the acquisition of a servitude over

that land, be based on the market value of that servitude,

and shall be proportionate to his interest in that land. No additional

compensation shall be allowed to him in consideration of the compulsory

nature of the acquisition, but, where it is the land which is to be acquired,

he shall be entitled to"

(i) compensation for any damage sustained by reason of the

severance of the land from his other land, the severance being

deemed to occur on the date on which the notice under section 7 in

respect of the land is published in the Gazette;

(ii) compensation for any damage sustained by reason of the

acquisition of the land injuriously affecting, in any manner other

than that mentioned in paragraph (i), his adjoining land or any

immovable property thereon, the injurious affection being deemed

to occur on the aforesaid date;

(iii) compensation for any such loss of earnings from any business

carried on the land on the aforesaid date as may be caused by the

acquisition of the land; and

(iv) any reasonable expenses of effecting any change of residence

necessarily caused by the acquisition of the land:

Provided that-

CA/BOR/0001/2023

Page 13 of 23

(a) the total amount of the compensation under paragraph (i) and

paragraph (ii) of this subsection shall not exceed twenty per centum

of the market value of the land to be acquired;

(b) the amount of the compensation under paragraph (iii) of this

subsection shall not exceed three times the average annual net

profits from the business, as shown by the books of accounts, for

the three calendar years immediately preceding the date on which

the notice under section 7 in respect of the land is published in the

Gazette; and

(c) no compensation shall be allowed under paragraph (iii) of this

subsection if the business is the sale or disposal of the produce of

the land to be acquired.

(2) Where any premises which are to be acquired under this Act are, and

but for their compulsory acquisition would continue to be, devoted to a

purpose of such a nature that there is no general demand or market for

land for that purpose, the compensation payable in respect of those

premises under this Act may, if the acquiring officer assessing the

compensation is satisfied that the persons interested in those premises

genuinely intend, when those premises are acquired, to provide for the

aforesaid purpose premises equally convenient as the acquired premises,

be assessed on the basis of the reasonable cost of providing for that

purpose premises equivalent to those which are to be acquired under this

Act.”

“46A. In determining under section 46 the compensation to be paid to any

person for the acquisition of any land, no account shall be taken of any

improvements made on the land by the State whether before or after the

date of commencement of this Act.”

“47. Where the compensation assessed under section 46 is for the

acquisition of only a part of any land, the amount by which the market

CA/BOR/0001/2023

Page 14 of 23

value of the remaining part of that land is likely to increase by reason of

such acquisition shall be deducted from the amount of such

compensation, the amount of the deduction being not more than twenty

per centum of the market value of such part of that land as is acquired

under this Act.”

“48. In determining under section 46 the compensation to be paid to any

person for the acquisition of a land or servitude, none of the following

matters shall be taken into consideration:"

(a) the degree of urgency which has led to the acquisition of the land

or servitude under this Act;

(b) his disinclination to part with his interest in the land or to allow

the acquisition of the servitude ;

(c) any damage sustained by him which, if caused by a private

person, would not render such person liable to a suit;

(d) any damage which, after the award of compensation, is likely to

be caused by or in consequence of the use to which the land or

servitude will be put after its acquisition under this Act;

(e) any increase which is likely to occur in the market value of the

land by reason of the use to which it will be put after its acquisition

under this Act;

(f) any outlay or improvement made or commenced on the land after

the notice under section 4 in respect of the land was given or

exhibited unless such outlay or improvement was reasonably for the

purpose of maintaining or preserving the land or any plantation,

building, fixture, or machinery thereon;

(g) the special suitability or adaptability of the land for any purpose

to which it could be applied only under statutory powers or for which

CA/BOR/0001/2023

Page 15 of 23

there is no market apart from the special needs of a particular

purchaser or the requirements of any Government department or

local authority or of any body of persons constituted by or under any

other written law;

(h) the amount of any such increase in the market value of the land

as has been caused by the use thereof or of any premises thereon in

a manner which can be restrained by any court or is contrary to law

or is detrimental to the health of the inmates of the premises or to

the public health.”

In the light of section 46(1)(a) of the Act, the amount of compensation to be paid

under the Act to any person interested in a land shall where the compensation

is for the acquisition of that land as in the instant case, be based on the market

value of that land.

What then, is the market value for the purposes of the Act?

In the light of the section 45 of the Act, the market value of a land in respect of

which a notice under section 7 thereof has been published, shall subject to the

provisions contained in part VI of the Act, be the amount which the land might

be expected to have realized if sold by a willing seller in the open market as a

separate entity on the date of the publication of that notice in the Gazette.

What then is the test/criteria to be applied in determining the market value

for the purposes of the Act?

The test/criteria to be applied in determining the market value of a land in

respect of which a notice under section 7 thereof has been published shall

subject to the provisions contained in part VI of the Act, be the test/criteria

which will determine the amount which the land might be expected to have

realized if sold by a willing seller in the open market as a separate entity

on the date of the publication of that notice in the Gazette. [Emphasis is

mine]

CA/BOR/0001/2023

Page 16 of 23

Applying the test/criteria laid down in section 45 of the Act to the facts of the

instant appeal, the test to be applied in determining the market value of the land

intended to be acquired by the Respondent in respect of which a notice under

section 7 thereof had been published by him, shall subject to the provisions

contained in part VI of the Act, be the test/criteria which will determine the

amount which the land intended to be acquired in the instant case might

be expected to have realized if sold by a willing seller in the open market

as a separate entity on the date of the publication of that notice in the

Gazette. (A2), namely; 25.04.1989 [Emphasis is mine]

What then is the material to be taken into consideration in determining the

market value of the land in respect of which notice under section 7 of the

Act has been published?

Answer thereto, can be found in the proviso to section 45(1) of the Act which

enacts that “Provided that, in determining that amount, all such returns and

assessments of income from, or of the capital or annual value of, that land

as have been made or acquiesced in by the owner of that land for the

purposes of any rate or tax imposed in respect of that land, shall be taken

into consideration.” [Emphasis is mine]

Hence, the material as envisaged by the proviso to section 45(1) of the Act, shall

be the material that should be taken into consideration in determining the

market value of the land in respect of which a notice under section 7 of the Act

has been published.

What then is the date on which the market value should be assessed?

In light of the proviso to section 45(1) of the Act, for the purposes of the Act, the

market value of a land in respect to which a notice under section 7 of the Act

has been published shall be the market value thereof, on the date of the

publication of that notice in the Gazette. [Emphasis is mine]

CA/BOR/0001/2023

Page 17 of 23

Applying the test to the facts of the instant action, the date on which the market

value shall be assessed, is the date of publication of the notice under section 7

of the Act in the Gazette (A2), namely; 25.04.1989 [Emphasis is mine].

It is trite principle of law that once a test and/or criteria and/or guideline has

been laid down by a Statute itself in determining a particular fact, Court is bound

to follow and apply the test and/or criteria and/or guideline so laid down by the

Statute itself in determining a particular fact as such in instances where the

language of the Statute or the provision thereof, is plain, simple and not lead to

any ambiguity and a Court cannot in such circumstances, rely on the judicial

precedent in that regard totally, disregarding the law laid down by a Statute

without first applying the test and/or criteria and/or guideline so laid down by

the Statute itself in determining a particular fact as such and judicial precedent

would in such circumstances, be of no assistance or of little assistance, in

determining the same.

Hence, not only the Acquiring Officer-the Respondent in the instant action but

also LABR in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction is bound to follow the test

and/or criteria and/or guideline so laid down by section 45 of the Act in

determining the market value of the land in respect of which a notice under

section 7 of the Act had been published by the Respondent in the instant action

for the purpose of determining the amount of compensation to be awarded to the

owner thereof, and neither the Acquiring Officer-the Respondent in the instant

action nor LABR has in such circumstances, power to look elsewhere without

first following and/ or applying the test and/or criteria and/or guideline so laid

down by section 45 of the Act in determining the market value of the land in

respect of which a notice under section 7 of the Act had been published by the

Respondent in the instant action for the purpose of determining the amount of

compensation to be awarded to the owner thereof.

Bearing in mind the law governing the assessment of the amount of

compensation and the mode of determination of the market value of a land in

CA/BOR/0001/2023

Page 18 of 23

respect of which a notice under section 7 of the Act has been published as laid

down by Part VI of the Act, let me now, examine the judicial precedent cited to

us by the Appellants in the submissions and its bearing on the resolution of the

issue at hand before us.

It was held by Court in decision in Stevens Vs. Munasinghe 42 NLR 446 cited

to us by the Appellants in the submissions that, where it is claimed that the

market value of a land acquired by the crown should be determined by the best

use to which it could be put, there must be evidence that there would be a

demand for the land when put to such use having regard to its nature and

situation. It is to be borne in mind that this being a decision pronounced by

Court on 08.04.1903-long before the Act came into being on 09.03.1950.

Peiris vs. Acquiring Officer, Kolonnawa 2003 [3] SLR 189 concerns an

application for an order in the nature of a writ of certiorari to quash the award

made by the Acquiring Officer under the provisions of the Act and an order in

the nature of a writ of mandamus directing the acquiring the officer either to

resume in a lawful manner the inquiry to compute the compensation payable to

the Petitioner under section 9 of the Act in respect of the acquisition of the land

morefully, described in the para 2 of the petition filed in Court whereas, the

instant appeal arises from an award made by LABR in the exercise of its

appeallate jurisdiction and therefore, the facts in the case referred to

hereinbefore can be clearly, distinguishable from the facts of the instant case

and therefore, the case cited to us as aforesaid, is of no assistance or of little

assistance in determining the issue at hand before us as enumerated above.

Besides, an application for a writ is governed by a different set of laws while, an

appeal is governed by a set of laws different to that of the one governing an

application for a writ. In this respect too, this case can be clearly, distinguishable

from the instant case.

In Government Agent Vs. Perera 7 NLR 313, at page 320 it was held by Court

that “There are undoubtably, several tests by which the market value of any

CA/BOR/0001/2023

Page 19 of 23

particular allotment of land may be arrived at, but one of the truest and fairest

is the actual amount paid for a similar allotment of land situated in the

same vicinity and used for similar purposes” [Emphasis is mine]

This Court in the decision in CA/LA/Acq. 04/2011 & 05/2011-decided on

12.12.2013, cited with approval a passage from the decision in Trustee Vs.

Rajarathnam 75 NLR 391, wherein it was inter-alia, held that, “In such a case

the prior sale price of a similar land in the vicinity should be taken into account”

Applying the test and/or the criteria laid down by section 45(1) of the Act, the

market value of the land intended to be acquired in the instant action shall

subject to the provisions contained therein, be the amount which the land might

be expected to have realized if sold by a willing seller in the open market as a

separate entity on the date of publication of the notice under section 7 of the Act

in the Gazette (A2), namely; 25.04.1989.

In the light of the proviso to section 45(1) of the Act, in determining that

amount, all such returns and assessments of income from, or of the capital

or annual value of, that land as have been made or acquiesced in by the

owner of that land for the purposes of any rate or tax imposed in respect of

that land, shall be taken into consideration. [Emphasis is mine]

It is no doubt that all such returns and assessments of income from, or of the

capital or annual value of, that land as have been made or acquiesced in by the

owner of that land for the purposes of any rate or tax imposed in respect of that

land should be in the possession of the Appellants.

Hence, it is incumbent upon the Appellants to have furnished those material

before the Acquiring Officer and/or LABR so as to enable them to have

determined the market value of the land intended to be acquired by the

Respondent on the date of the publication of the notice under section 7 of the

Act on 25.04.1989 in the Gazette (A2) for; it was the Appellants who had asserted

that perch value of the land intended to be acquired by the Respondent on the

date of the publication of the notice under section 7 of the Act on 25.04.1989 in

CA/BOR/0001/2023

Page 20 of 23

the Gazette was Rs. 120,000/- and therefore, sole burden of proof will lie on the

Appellants to prove what they had asserted before it in terms of section 3 of the

Evidence Ordinance to be read with sections 101,102 and 103 thereof.

However, it manifestly, appears upon a careful scrutiny of the proceedings before

LABR, that the Appellants had totally, failed to furnish thereto, any of those

documents as envisaged by the proviso to section 45(1) of the Act so as to enable

the Respondent and/ or LABR to have determined the market value of the land

intended to be acquired by the Respondent on the date of the publication of the

notice under section 7 of the Act on 25.04.1989 in the Gazette (A2) on the basis

that perch value thereof, was Rs. 120,000/- on that day as asserted by the

Appellants.

Furthermore, the Appellants had heavily, relied on the documentary evidence

produced before LABR through their expert witness the said Mr. Kaleel-Private

Valuer marked as ‘A9’ and ‘A12’ in determining the market value of the land

intended to be acquired by the Respondent on the basis of the comparable

method of valuation and/or on the basis of past awards and/or past sales as a

basis of valuation.

Under and in terms of Section 10(1)(a) of the Act, the 1st Appellant had been

awarded 15.80 perches from and out of the land intended to be acquired by the

Respondent while, the 2nd Appellant had been awarded 146.19 perches

therefrom. In terms of Section 17 of the Act, the 1st Appellant had been awarded

Rs. 71201.92/- as compensation and the 2nd Appellant had been awarded Rs.

658,798.08/- as compensation. It is against this decision of the Respondent

awarding compensation to each of them as aforesaid, the 1st and 2nd Appellants

had filed an appeal before LABR.

The 1st and 2nd Appellants had notified their respective claims to the Respondent

in respect of the land intended to be acquired by him on the basis that, perch

value thereof being Rs. 120,000/- on the date of the publication of the notice

under section 7 of the Act in the Gazette (A2) on 25.04.1989. However, it is

CA/BOR/0001/2023

Page 21 of 23

significant to observe that the Private Valuer-Mr. A. R. M. M. Kaleel, who was

called by the Appellants before LABR had valued a perch at Rs. 34,000/-. In

arriving at the said valuation by the Private Valuer-Mr. A. R. M. M. Kaleel, the

past decisions of LABR in Review Board Nos. CL 1151, CL 1152, CL 1221 had

been heavily, relied on by him when the Appellants had produced those past

decisions through their expert witness the said Mr. Kaleel marked as ‘A9’ and

‘A12’ before the LABR.

However, upon a careful consideration of those past decisions of LARB (A9 and

A12) it clearly, appears that the property-the subject matters of those past

decisions would fall not within the Sri Jayawardenapura Kotte, Urban Council

Limit but within the Colombo Municipal Council limit in the first place; and that

they all are prime residential plots in terms of location in the second place; and

that those decisions were decisions admittedly, made in the year 1991 and 1992-

two or three years after the publication of the notice under section 7 of the Act

in the Gazette (A2) on 25.04.1989 in the third place, so it is not in any manner,

possible to directly, compare them with the land intended to be acquired by the

Respondent using the comparable method of valuation as the basis of the

valuation in determining the market value of the land intended to be acquired

by the Respondent on the date of the publication of the notice under section 7 of

the Act in the Gazette (A2) on 25.04.1989 as rightly, held by LABR.

Hence, it clearly, appears that the valuation submitted by the Private Valuer Mr.

Kaleel for the 1st and 2nd Appellants valuing a perch at Rs. 34,000/- of the land

intended to be acquired by the Respondent on the date of the publication of the

notice under section 7 of the Act in the Gazette (A2) on 25.04.1989 had not been

supported by any evidence oral or documentary by the Appellants and therefore,

it is without any basis and as such it cannot, sustain both in fact and law and

therefore, it should be rejected as rightly, found by LABR.

These findings of LABR had been well, supported by the evidence of Ms. Geetha

Fernando-the Government Valuer before LABR that the past sales of marshy

CA/BOR/0001/2023

Page 22 of 23

lands pertaining to a similar allotment of land situated in the same vicinity and

used for similar purposes, could not be traced by her.

Moreover, the documentary evidence, produced by the Respondents through his

expert witness Ms. Geetha Fernando, the Government Valuer attached to the

Government Valuation Department marked as ‘R11’ too, is of no assistance in

determining the market value of the land intended to be acquired by the

Respondent for a public purpose on the date of the publication of the notice

under section 7 of the Act in the Gazette (A2) on 25.04.1989 for; it only shows a

number of past sales of residential plots and not the past sales pertaining to a

similar allotment of land situated in the same vicinity and used for similar

purposes as rightly, held by LABR.

in view of the foregoing, I would hold that the Appellant had not established in

evidence either before the Respondent or LABR any of the two different positions

so adverted to by them respectively, before the Respondent and LABR that perch

value of the land intended to be acquired by the Respondent is Rs. 120,000/- on

the date of the publication of the notice under section 7 of the Act in the Gazette

(A2) on 25.04.1989 as notified to the Respondent by them; and that perch value

of the land intended to be acquired by the Respondent on the date of the

publication of the notice under section 7 of the Act in the Gazette (A2) on

25.04.1989 is Rs. 34,000/- as per the valuation submitted by the Private Valuer

Mr. Kaleel for the 1st and 2nd Appellants.

In the circumstances, LABR had having considered the evidence oral and

documentary adduced before it by both the Appellants as well as the

Respondent, proceeded to assess the amount of compensation to be awarded to

each of the Appellants on the basis that the market value of a perch thereof is

Rs. 6000.00/- thereby, setting aside the decision of the Respondent with regard

to the award of compensation to each of the Appellants and substituting therefor

the amount of compensation to be awarded to each of the Appellants as

determined by LABR in its decision now under challenge before us.

CA/BOR/0001/2023

Page 23 of 23

However, it is significant to observe that the Appellants had not shown to us any

reason in the course of the argument why the order of LABR with regard to the

assessment of the amount of compensation to be awarded to each of the

Appellants should be set aside or varied.

Hence, I would see no legal basis to interfere with the order of LABR with regard

to the assessment of the amount of compensation to be awarded to each of the

Appellants in the absence of any evidence to the contrary.

I would thus, affirm the order of LABR under appeal.

In the result, I would dismiss the appeal.

In view of all the above circumstances, I make no order for costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL