==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/109/24

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal Case No. Dilan Anuruddha Liyanarachchi alias

CA/HCC/ 0109/2024 Dilan Mama alias Dilan

High Court of Ampara

Case No. HC-AMP/2044/2019

APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

CA/HCC/109/24

2 | P a g e

COUNSEL : Darshana Kuruppu with Tharushi Gamage

Anjana Adhikaramge and Rajitha

Kulatunga for the Appellant.

Wasantha Perera, DSG for the

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 18/11/2025

DECIDED ON : 14/01/2026

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Appellant was indicted by the Attorney General under

Section 365B (2) (b) of the Penal Code for committing one count of grave

sexual abuse on Kankanamge Thisari Yuwanika Liyanarachchi on

13.10.2018.

The trial commenced on 23.10.2019. After leading all necessary witnesses,

the prosecution closed the case. The learned High Court Judge had called

CA/HCC/109/24

3 | P a g e

for the defence and the Appellant had made a dock statement and closed his

case.

The learned High Court Judge, after considering the evidence presented by

both parties before him and his predecessor, convicted the Appellant as

charged and sentenced the Appellant to 08 years of rigorous imprisonment

and imposed a fine of Rs. 20,000/- subject to a default sentence of 06

months simple imprisonment.

In addition, a compensation of Rs.250,000/- was ordered with a default

sentence of 02 years simple imprisonment.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent to argue this matter in his absence. During the argument

he was connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

The Facts of this case albeit briefly are as follows.

In this case, video recorded evidence of the victim was played in the open

court under Section 163A of the Evidence Ordinance as her examination -

in-chief. Hence, I consider reproducing Section 163A of the Evidence

Ordinance to be very important.

163A (1). In any proceedings for an offence relating to child abuse a video

recording of a preliminary interview which-

(a) is conducted between an adult and a child who is not the accused in

such proceeding (hereinafter referred to in this section as “a child

witness”); and

(b) relates to any matter in issue in those proceedings.

May notwithstanding the provisions of other law with the leave of the

Court, be given in evidence in so far as it is not excluded by Court under

subsection (2).

CA/HCC/109/24

4 | P a g e

(2) Where a video recording is tendered in evidence in any proceedings

referred to in subsection (1), the Court shall give leave under that

subsection unless-

(a) it appears to Court, that the child witness will not be available for

cross-examination in such proceedings; or

(b) any rules of Court requiring the disclosure of the circumstances in

which the video recording was made have not been complied with to the

satisfaction of the Court.

(3) Where a video recording is given in evidence under this section-

(a) the child witness shall be called by the party who tendered the video

recording in evidence;

(b) such child witness shall not be examined in chief on any matter which

in the opinion of the Court, has been dealt with in his recorded testimony.

(4) Where a video recording is given in evidence under this section, any

statement made by the child witness which is disclosed by the video

recording shall be treated as if given by that child witness in direct oral

testimony and accordingly, any such statement shall be admissible

evidence of any fact of which direct oral testimony from him would be

admissible.

(5) Where the child witness, in the course of his direct oral testimony

before Court, contradicts, either expressly or by necessary implication,

any statement previously made by him and disclosed by the video

recording, it shall be lawful for the presiding Judge, if he considers it safe

and just in all the circumstances of the case to act upon such previous

statements as disclosed by the video recording, if such previous

statement is corroborated in material particulars by evidence from an

independent source.

CA/HCC/109/24

5 | P a g e

PW1 - the victim of this case, had been about 08 years old when she faced

this grave violation. At the time of giving evidence, she was 12 years old and

was still schooling. The victim has siblings and she had been in grade 03 at

the time of this incident.

The alleged incident had happened while she was watching T.V at a

neighbouring house. She had gone there with all her siblings. At that time

the Appellant had entered the house and kept the victim on his lap and

touched her body. When the Appellant performed this act, her siblings were

not in the house. After touching her body, the Appellant took the victim to a

nearby room and made the victim to sit on a polythene sheet. Thereafter, the

Appellant had raised her frock, lowered her panty, and licked her vagina

despite her resistance. The Appellant had continued the act until a small

child had opened the curtain of the door. Thereafter, the Appellant had told

the victim not to divulge this to anybody and promised that he would buy

toffees for her.

At that time the owner of the house had gone to a nearby house. Hence,

nobody was at home when the Appellant committed this offence. After the

act, when the victim resumed watching T.V, the Appellant had started to

touch her body again. Seeing this her elder brother had called the victim to

come near him.

The victim had first divulged this incident to her elder sister and her elder

sister had conveyed the same to PW5, Sandya.

The JMO who had examined the victim had not excluded the possibility of

sexual abuse. In her history to the doctor, the victim had stated the same as

in her interview.

After the closure of the prosecution’s case, the defence was called, and the

Appellant denied the charges while he gave evidence from the witness box.

CA/HCC/109/24

6 | P a g e

The following Grounds of Appeal were raised on behalf of the Appellant:

I. The Learned Trial Judge erred in law and in fact by failing to

consider and give due weight to the material circumstance that

neither PW-01, Kankanamge Thisari Yuwanika Liyanarachchi (the

prosecutrix), nor PW-05, Jayasinghe Mudiyanselage Sandya

Dilhani (the lady of the house where the incident is alleged to have

occurred), made any disclosure whatsoever of an act of sexual

abuse at the first opportunity. Their initial accounts, given on the

very day of the alleged incident, referred only to the Accused-

Appellant touching the child’s hand, and contained no allegation of

sexual misconduct. The Learned Trial Judge’s failure to evaluate

this crucial omission, and its impact on the credibility of the later,

embellished allegation, amounts to a material non-direction and a

grave misappreciation of evidence, thereby occasioning a

miscarriage of justice.

II. The Learned Trial judge has failed to consider that the prosecution

hasn’t proved the date of offence beyond reasonable doubt.

III. The Learned Trial judge has misdirected himself in law by holding

that the date of offence is not an ingredient of the offence that the

prosecution should prove.

IV. The Learned Trial judge has failed to consider that the unexplained

inordinate delay of the first complaint creates a reasonable doubt

on the prosecution case.

V. The Learned Trial judge has failed to consider that the unexplained

inordinate delay to conduct the video recording interview of the

Victim’s creates a reasonable doubt on the prosecution case.

VI. The Learned Trial judge has failed to consider that the story of the

prosecution is highly improbable and doesn’t inspire confidence to

convict the accused-appellant.

CA/HCC/109/24

7 | P a g e

VII. The Learned Trial judge has failed to consider that the serious

contradiction of the prosecution witnesses goes to the very root of

the prosecution case.

VIII. The accused-appellant was denied the right to the fair trial by

• Conducting the pre-trial conference after the conclusion of

evidence of JMO.

• Not providing the defence a copy of video recording interview

prior to the evidence of the JMO.

• By playing the video recording in the presence of the

prosecutrix Kankanamge Thisari Yuwanika Liyanarachchi

(PW 01).

In a case of this nature, the testimonial trustworthiness and credibility of

PW1; particularly the probability of the occurrence of events as recounted by

her should be assessed with utmost care and caution by the Trial Judge. The

learned Trial Judge must satisfy and accept the evidence of a child witness

after assessing her competence and credibility as a witness.

In Ranjeet Kumar Ram v. State of Bihar [2015] SCC Online SC 500 the

court held that:

“Evidence of the child witness and its credibility would depend upon the

circumstances of each case. Only precaution which the court has to bear

in mind while assessing the evidence of a child witness is that the

witness must be a reliable one”.

In Ratansinh Dalsukhbhai Nayak v. State of Gujarat [2004] 1 SCC 64 the

court held that:

“The decision on the question whether the child witness has sufficient

intelligence primarily rests with the trial Judge who notices his manners,

his apparent possession or lack of intelligence, and said Judge may resort

CA/HCC/109/24

8 | P a g e

to any examination which will tend to disclose his capacity and intelligence

as well as his understanding of the obligation of an oath. The decision of

the trial court may, however, be disturbed by the higher Court if from what

is preserved in the records, it is clear his conclusion was erroneous. This

precaution is necessary because child witnesses are amenable to tutoring

and often live in a world of make beliefs. Though it is an established

principle that child witnesses are dangerous witnesses as they are pliable

and liable to be influenced easily, shaked and moulded, but it is also an

accepted norm that if after careful scrutiny of their evidence the Court

comes to the conclusion that there is an impress of truth in it, there is no

obstacle in the way of accepting the evidence of a child witness”.

In the case of R v Barker [2010] EWCA Crim 4 – Lord Chief Justice

(England and Wales Court of Appeal) it was held;

“……We emphasise that in our collective experience the age of a witness

is not determinative on his or her ability to give truthful and accurate

evidence. Like adults some children will provide truthful and accurate

testimony, and some will not. However, children are not miniature adults,

but children, and to be treated and judged for what they are, not what they

will, in years ahead, grow to be. Therefore, although due allowance must

be made in the trial process for the fact that they are children with, for

example, a shorter attention span than most adults, none of the

characteristics of childhood, and none of the special measures which apply

to the evidence of children carry with them the implicit stigma that children

should be deemed in advance to be somehow less reliable than adults. The

purpose of the trial process is to identify the evidence which is reliable and

that which is not, whether it comes from an adult or a child. If competent,

as defined by the statutory criteria, in the context of 12 credibility in the

forensic process, the child witness starts off on the basis of equality with

every other witness. In trial by jury, his or her credibility is to be assessed

by the jury, taking into account every specific personal characteristic which

CA/HCC/109/24

9 | P a g e

may bear on the issue of credibility, along with the rest of the available

evidence.”

In State of UP. v Krishna Master AIR 2010 SC 3071 it was held;

“This Court is of the firm opinion that it would be doing injustice to a child

witness possessing sharp memory to say that it is inconceivable for him to

recapitulate facts in his memory witnessed by him long ago. A child of

tender age is always receptive to abnormal events which take place in its

life and would never forget those events for the rest of his life. The child

would be able to recapitulate correctly and exactly when asked about the

same in future.”

Considering the 1st ground of appeal, I agree with the learned Deputy

Solicitor General that the victim had encountered her bitter ordeal at a very

tender age. She was only 08 years old and reasonably cannot be expected to

give 100% accurate evidence. But in her evidence-in-chief produced by way

of a video recorded interview, she had very correctly recalled the events which

had taken place on that day. The Learned High Court Judge had very

correctly and accurately analysed the evidence given by witnesses in his

judgment and had arrived at a correct finding.

In Don Kuruppu Arachchige Indika Gayan v The Republic of Sri Lanka,

CA/205/2007 Ranjith Silva, J. held that:

“A small child who had undergone such harrowing experience mental and

physical torture and trauma, is bound to make mistake with regard to the

dates and also bound to confuse several acts of sexual intimacy from one

another”.

In the second and the third grounds of appeal, the learned Counsel has

argued that the prosecution has failed to prove the date of offence which

certainly affects the core of the case.

CA/HCC/109/24

10 | P a g e

In the indictment, the date of offence has clearly been mentioned. The victim

giving evidence had clearly said that the incident had taken place on a

Saturday. The victim was just 08 years old when she encountered this bitter

ordeal.

As per the Section 165 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979,

the Appellant had been given reasonable notice regarding the time of

incident. For clarity the Section 165 of CPC is re-produced below:

Particulars as to time, place and person.

(1) The charge shall contain such particulars as to the time and place

of the alleged offence and as to the person (if any) against whom and

as to the thing (if any) in respect of which it was committed as are

reasonably sufficient to give the accused notice of the matter with

which he is charged and to show that the offence is not prescribed.

(2) When the accused is charged with criminal breach of trust or

dishonest misappropriation of movable property, it shall be sufficient

to specify the gross sum or, as the case may be, the gross quantity in

respect of which the offence is alleged to have been committed, and

the dates between which the offence is alleged to have been committed

without specifying particular items or exact dates, and the charge so

framed shall be deemed to be a charge of one offence within the

meaning of section 174:

Provided that the time included between the first and last of such dates

shall not exceed one year.

(3) When the nature of the case is such that the particulars mentioned

in section 164 and the preceding subsections of this section do not

give the accused sufficient notice of the matter with which he is

charged, the charge shall also contain such particulars of the manner

in which the alleged offence was committed as will be sufficient for that

purpose.

CA/HCC/109/24

11 | P a g e

In Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai v. State of Gujarat (supra) the court held further:

“In regard to exact time of an incident, or the time duration of an

occurrence, usually, people make their estimates by guess work on the

spur of the moment at the time of interrogation. And one cannot expect

people to make very precise or reliable estimates in such matters.”

“It is unrealistic to expect a witness to be a human tape recorder.”

In R. v. Dossi 13 Cr. App. R. 158 the court held that:

“A date specified in an indictment is not a material matter unless it is

an essential part of the alleged offence; the defendant may be convicted

although the jury finds that the offence was committed on a date other

than that specified in the indictment. Amendment of the indictment is

unnecessary, although it will be good practice to do so (provided that

there is no prejudice below) where it is clear on the evidence that if the

offence was committed at all, it was committed on the day other than

that specified.”

As the Appellant had been given sufficient notice regarding the date of offence

under which he had been indicted, and plausible evidence was led through

witnesses regarding the period, I conclude that this has not caused any

prejudice or failure of justice, as the Appellant had raised a totally different

issue in the trial. The Learned High Court Judge in his judgment had

addressed this issue very correctly to come to his decision. The relevant

portion of the judgment is re-produced below:

Pages 211-212 of the brief.

tneúka wêfpdaokd m;%hl i`oyka oskh tlS fpdaokdfjys i`oyka jro iïnkaOfhka úia;r

bosrsm;a lsrSfï ld¾hh i`oyd muKla i`oyka fldg we;s lreKla f,i ie<lsh yel'

CA/HCC/109/24

12 | P a g e

tneúka jro isÿ lrk ,o oskh ksYaÑ; oskh meñKs,a, úiska Tmamq fkdlsrSu pQos;fhl=g

w.;sodhS f,i n,mEula we;s lrk lreKla f,ig ie<lsh fkdyel' fï wjia:dfõoS pQos;

úiska bosrsm;a fldg we;s ú;a;sjdplh iïnkaOfhka wjOdkh fhduq lsrSu WÑ; fõ'

wêlrKh úiska ú;a;sjdplh le`ojk ,ÿj pQos; ú;a;s l+vqfõ isg m%ldYhla isÿ fldg

we;' tysoS Tyq" Tyqg t,a, ù we;s fpdaokdj m%;slafIam lsrSula isÿ lr fkdue;s w;r" Tyq

i`oyka fldg we;s tlu ldrKh jkafka isoaêh jQ oskfha oS Tyq wêl f,i îu;aj isá nj;a"

tf,i Tyq wêl f,i îu;aj isàu ksid tu oskfhaoS isÿ jQ lsisÿ isoaêhla Tyqg u;l

fkdue;s njh'

;jo" úfYaIfhka fuysoS wjOdkh fhduq l< hq;= lreKla jkafka pQos; lsisÿ wjia:djl

jro isÿ jQ oskh iïnkaOfhka yn lsrSula isÿ fldg fkdue;' tneúka pQos; úiska ú;a;s

l+vqfõ isg isÿ lrk ,o m%ldYh u`.ska meñKs,af,a kvqlrh flfrys lsisÿ wdldrhl

idOdrK ielhla cks; lsrSug iu;a ù fkdue;s nj fuu wêlrKfha ks.ukhhs'

Next the learned Counsel highlighting the 4th and 5th grounds of appeal

strenuously argued that the unexplained delay in lodging the 1st complaint

and the delay in video recording had caused great prejudice to the Appellant.

According to the evidence of PW14, the investigating officer, the first

complaint had been lodged on 18.10.2018, five days after the incident.

Further, the video recording had been done about two months after the

incident. The learned High Court Judge in his judgment had very correctly

considered the delay in making the first complaint and the video recording

and had given reasons as to why the evidence given by the victim was

accepted. The relevant portion is re-produced below:

Pages 213-214 of the brief.

by; i`oyka lrk ,o Thimbirigolle Sirirathna Thero Vs. Attorney General

kvqfõ oS l=vd orefjl= wmfhdackhg ,la jQ úg ta ms<sn`o meñKs,s lsrSug wmrdO úkaos;f.a

mjqf,a idudcslhka fojrla is;d ne,Sug ld,h .; ùu idudkH ;;a;ajhla nj;a" fujeks

jroj,a fy<s lsrSu ;=<ska wmrdO úkaos;hg Ndckh ùug isÿ úh yels idudcSh n,mEu

ms<sn`o wmrdO úkaos;f.a mjqf,a idudcslhkag i,ld ne,Sug isÿùu jeo.;a lreKla nj;a

tysoS hïlsis m%udohla isÿ úh yels nj;a wêlrKh úiska wjOdkh fhduq fldg we;' ;jo

CA/HCC/109/24

13 | P a g e

tu kvq ;SkaÿfõoS ,sx.sl wmfhdackhkag Ndckh jQ orefjl= ta ms<sn`oj olajk m%;spdrh

taldldrS fkdjk nj;a úúOdldrfha m%;spdr olajk nj;a iuyr úkaos;hka tlajru

meñKs,s lsrSu isÿ lrk w;r" iuyr úkaos;hka ìhùu" lïmkhg m;aùu" ,ecacdjg m;a

ùu" ;SrKhla .ekSug fkdyelsj isàu" uo fyda isoaêfhka wk;=rej hï ld,iSudjla

.;jk;=re l;d lsrSfuka je<lS isàu jeks m%;spdr olajk njg wêlrKh úiska wjOdkh

fhduq fldg we;' tjeks ;;a;ajhla hgf;a oS meñKs,a,la isÿ lsrSug m%udohla isÿ úh yels

njo tu kvq ;Skaÿfõ oS wêlrKh i,ld n,d we;' ;jo tjeks wmrdO úkaos;fhl=g

m%udoh ms<sn`o idOdrK fya;=jla wêlrKfhaoS bosrsm;a lsrSug fkdyels úh yels njo tu

kvqfõ oS wêlrKh wjOdkh fhduq fldg we;'

Next considering the 6th and seventh grounds of appeal, the Appellant

contends that the story of the prosecution is highly improbable and that the

learned High Court Judge had not considered the serious contradictions of

the prosecution witnesses which certainly affect the root of the case.

The learned Counsel for the Appellant seriously argued that PW2, the mother

of the victim, in her evidence, only stated that the Appellant had held the

victim by her hand. As such, the Counsel contends that there is a

contradiction between the evidence of PW1, PW2 and PW5.

According to the victim she had told the incident to PW5, who is the owner

of the house. According to PW5, the victim had told her that the Appellant

had removed her undergarment and placed his face. Immediately after she

heard this, she had removed the victim’s undergarment and inspected her

vagina and had noticed no abnormality. Although she had told this to PW2,

she had not inquired in detail. PW2 had admitted that she did not inquire

fully as the case was handled by her husband.

Further, the Appellant in his dock statement did not deny the incident. He

had simply said that he was under the influence of liquor and was unable to

remember as to what happened after his intoxication.

The learned High Court Judge in his judgment had very correctly analysed

the evidence of the prosecutrix and had given reasons as to why he accepted

the same.

CA/HCC/109/24

14 | P a g e

In The Attorney General v. Sandanam Pitchai Mary Theresa [2011] 2 SLR

292 the court held that:

“Whilst internal contradictions or discrepancies would ordinarily affect

the trustworthiness of the witness statement, it is well established that

the Court must exercise its judgment on the nature of the inconsistency

or contradiction and whether they are true material to the facts in issue.”

In this case, the credibility of the evidence given by the victim did not suffer

at any stage of the trial. Further, the contradiction marked in the evidence

of PW5 is not forceful enough to shake the credibility of the victim or the core

issues of the case against the Appellant.

In the final ground of appeal, the learned Counsel for the Appellant

contended that the Appellant was not served the copy of the video recording

interview prior to the evidence of the JMO. Further he contended that when

the interview was played in open court, the victim was inside the court and

had listened to the same.

It is notable that the Appellant, when being represented by a Counsel at the

High Court trial, did not challenge the production of the video recording

evidence at any point, before the Court, nor had taken the necessary steps

in that regard. In fact, in order to present the Appellant’s case, he had relied

on the evidence presented. This clearly establishes that no prejudice or

failure in relation to the substantial rights of the Appellant had taken place

in any way during the course of the trial.

Furthermore, in respect of the facts and the circumstances of the case under

appeal, although the Trial Court and Prosecution had not followed the

requirements stated above in its chronological order, it is evident that the

prosecution and the Trial Court have fulfilled the necessary requirements to

grant a fair trial towards the Appellant.

CA/HCC/109/24

15 | P a g e

The learned High Court Judge had considered the evidence given by PW1

with caution and care and had correctly held that her evidence is convincing

and cogent and sufficient on its own to prove the case against the Appellant.

In criminal law, the principle of the presumption of innocence and the

principle of reasonable doubt are two extremely fundamental principles

which requires the prosecution to prove the guilt of the Accused beyond

reasonable doubt.

“Reasonable doubt” refers to the legal principle which establishes that

insufficient evidence would prevent the conviction of a defendant of a crime.

The prosecution bears the weight of proving to the judge the defendant’s

guilt in respect of the crime with which he has been charged, in order to

prove why the defendant should be convicted. Accordingly, in this context,

the phrase “beyond a reasonable doubt" indicates that the evidence and

arguments brought forward by the prosecution to establish the defendant’s

guilt must be done so clearly, in a manner that it is accepted as fact by any

rational person.

In Nandana Kumarage Sujeewa v Officer-in-charge, Police Station,

Rambukkana SC/APPEAL/61/2023 it was reaffirmed that:

“The fundamental principle in criminal law is that the burden of proving

the charge beyond a reasonable doubt lies solely with the prosecution and

never shifts to the accused…. Therefore, the shifting of the burden referred

to previously does not diminish the prosecution’s responsibility to prove

the case beyond a reasonable doubt. The burden shifts only after the

prosecution has established its case, not before that stage is reached.”

Considering the evidence led in this case and guided by the judgements

mentioned above, I conclude that this is not an appropriate case in which

the judgement delivered by the learned High Court Judge on 14/11/2023

against the Appellant can be interfered upon. I therefore, dismiss the appeal.

CA/HCC/109/24

16 | P a g e

The sentence will be operative from the day the Appellant appears before the

High Court of Ampara.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgement to the High

Court of Ampara along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL