IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1. W.S.P. Wijewardena,

No. 38,

Ratnayake Mawatha,

Pelawatta,

Battaramulla.

2. D. Wijewardena,

No. 38,

Ratnayake Mawatha,

Pelawatta,

Battaramulla.

Petitioners

CASE NO: CA/WRIT/145/2015

Vs.

1. Gamini Gunasekera,

Municipal Commissioner,

Kaduwela Municipal Council,

Kaduwela.

1A. G. Lekha Geethanjali Perera,

Municipal Commissioner,

Kaduwela Municipal Council,

Kaduwela.

2

1B. Saparamadu Mahabala

Mayadunna Vijitha Mayadunna,

Municipal Commissioner,

Kaduwela Municipal Council,

Kaduwela.

2. Kaduwela Municipal Council,

Kaduwela.

3. G.H. Buddhadasa,

Mayor,

Municipal Council,

Kaduwela.

3A. G. Lekha Geethanjali Perera,

Municipal Commissioner,

Kaduwela Municipal Council,

Kaduwela.

3B. Gabadage Buddhika Thushara

Jayavilal,

Mayor,

Municipal Council,

Kaduwela.

4. Ariyaratne,

Member.

5. Mr. Priyashantha,

Member.

6. Mr. Oscar,

Member,

(The 3rd-6th are Members of the

Plaining Committee of the

Kaduwela Municipal Council)

Respondents

3

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: J.C. Weliamuna, P.C., with Thilini Vidanagamage for

the Petitioner.

Ananda Kasturiarachchi for the Respondents.

Decided on: 01.02.2019

Samayawardhena, J.

The two petitioners, husband and wife respectively, have filed

this application seeking (a) to quash the decision of the 1st

respondent Municipal Commissioner contained in P14 and (b) to

compel the 1st respondent to approve the Development Plan

without the restrictions in P14.

This application of the petitioners revolves around an

application made by the petitioners to the Kaduwela Municipal

Council for approval to construct a parapet wall around their

land described in Deed P1.

By P14, Municipal Commissioner has, it appears, agreed to

approve the Plan P11 on two conditions: (a) the existing

boundary wall shall be removed, and (b) 2 foot reservation

shall be left for the western access road.

After the petitioners purchased this land by Deed P1, they have

admittedly erected a chain-link fence without the approval of

the Municipal Council, and have later agreed to obtain the

necessary approval for itvide the letter of the 1st petitioner sent

to the Municipal Council marked P6. This approval has not

4

been obtained up to now. Hence condition (a) in P14 is not

illegal (although it says wall instead of chain-link fence).

The western boundary of the land is Colonel Ashoka Mawatha.

This boundary has not been described in the Development Plan

P11 (and only Northern, Southern and Eastern boundaries are

described in it).

In Plan P11, the western boundary is Road 10 feet wide, but

according to paragraph 1 of the petition and the corresponding

paragraph of the affidavit, the western boundary is 12 foot

road.

Further, it is clear even to the naked eye, by looking at the

petitioners Plan P11 itself, (but subject to verification) that the

road running abutting the western boundary is 10 feet wide only

in the western side of the petitioners Lot, but above the

petitioners Lot, Colonel Ashoka Mawatha is wider.

However it is not clear (if at all) how many feet the petitioners or

their predecessors have encroached from the western boundary;

and how and why the Municipal Council by P14 says that 2

foot strip of land shall be left from the western boundary for

Colonel Ashoka Mawatha.

The respondents in their written submissions have drawn the

attention of Court to Regulation 19 of the UDA Planning and

Building Regulations, 1986, published in the Gazette No. 392/9

dated 10.03.1986 which inter alia states that Where no street

lines have been determined for any street under any act or

regulations the authority may determine a street line for such

street taking into account the existing and proposed character of

development and the nature and volume of traffic anticipated in

5

such street. However there is no proof that the Municipal

Council took the decision P14 in terms of those Regulations. In

fact, there is no indication on what basis P14 was taken.

I must stress that when P14 is compared with P12, it is clear

that the Municipal Council takes decisions and changes

decisions without any seriousness and responsibility. There is

no consistency in their decisions.

There is a misconception that in exercising writ jurisdiction, this

Court has no power to give directions to the authorities

concerned. In Wickremasighe v. Chandrananda de Silva,

Secretary Ministry of Defence [2001] 2 Sri LR 333 at 353

Gunawardena J. held:

That justice is blind does not mean judges should not be

clear sighted. Besides, as stated above as well under the

judicial review procedure the court exercises a supervisory

jurisdiction. A court exercising such supervisory powers can

inspect and even direct. Under the judicial review

procedure, far from being confined to the matters averred in

the petition, the court is less inhibited and is free to adopt a

more interventionist attitude-not with a view to withholding

or denying relief but with a view to grant it when justice of

the case demands that such a course of action be adopted.

For the aforesaid reasons, I make the following orders.

(a) This Court cannot direct the Municipal Council by

mandamus to approve Plan P11 as it is.

(b) The first condition in P14 is not illegal or arbitrary and

therefore cannot be quashed by certiorari.

6

(c) The second condition in P14 is pro forma set aside by

certiorari and direct the 1st respondent to review the said

condition and make a fresh decision after a fresh inquiry

with the participation of the petitioners. In that decision,

the 1st respondent shall state the basis/reasons for the

decision.

The application is partly allowed. No costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal