IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Gurugodage Dinusha Chanaka

Perera,

No.15, Meetotamulla Road,

Kolonnawa.

Appearing by his duly appointed

Attorney Wedage Rajindra

Fonseka,

No.15, Meetotamulla Road,

Kolonnawa.

Petitioner

CASE NO: CA/WRIT/439/2015

Vs.

1. A.A. Thilakeratne,

Additional Secretary (Housing

and Development),

Ministry of Housing and

Samurdhi,

Commissioner of National

Housing,

2nd Floor, Sethsiripaya,

Sri Jayawardenapura Kotte,

Battaramulla.

2

1A. Nimal Kotawalagedera,

Additional Secretary (Housing

and Development),

Commissioner of National

Housing (Acting),

Ministry of National Housing and

Development,

2nd Floor, Sethsiripaya,

Battaramulla.

1B. Shamal Amith Collure,

Commissioner of National

Housing,

Ministry of National Housing and

Development,

2nd Floor, Sethsiripaya,

Battaramulla.

1C. Sarath Athukorale,

Commissioner of National

Housing,

Ministry of Urban Development,

Water Supply and Housing,

2nd Floor, Sethsiripaya,

Battaramulla.

2. P.W.A. Don Koranelis,

10/2, Meetotamulla Road,

Wellampitiya.

3. Pagoda Wijesinghe Arachchige

Don Mayura Sanjeewa,

10/2, Meetotamulla Road,

Wellampitiya,

Respondents

3

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

Counsel: Ranjan Suwandarathna, P.C., with Inoka

Hendawitharana and Lahiru Abhayaratne for

the Petitioner.

Anusha Fernando, D.S.G., for the 1C

Respondent.

C.E. de Silva for the 2nd and 3rd Respondents.

Argued on: 17.07.2020

Decided on: 02.09.2020

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The premises in suit, No.10/2, Meetotamulla Road,

Wellampitiya, vested in the 1st Respondent, the Commissioner of

National Housing, upon a declaration made by the original

owner of the property, Marshal Fonseka, as a surplus house

under the Ceiling on Housing Property Law, No.1 of 1973. By

the time the said declaration was made, Marshal Fonseka is said

to have gifted the property to his daughter, Srimathie Fonseka,

by Deed No.7182 marked A2. Upon the death of Marshal

Fonseka, his widow requested the Commissioner of National

Housing to invalidate the vesting on the basis that her deceased

husband had been mentally unsound when he made the said

declaration. The Commissioner of National Housing by letter

marked A3 informed Marshal Fonsekas widow to file an action

before a competent Court seeking redress. She filed case

No.2053/SPL in the District Court of Colombo against the

Commissioner of National Housing, seeking a declaration of title

4

to the premises, a permanent injunction preventing the

Commissioner of National Housing from alienating the premises,

and damages. The Commissioner of National Housing was

represented in the District Court by State Counsel Ameer Ismail

(who later adorned the Bench of the Supreme Court). The Court

entered a inter partes decree dated 14.10.1982 that the premises

had never vested in the Commissioner of National Housing

vide A6. No appeal was filed against the said Judgment.

Srimathie Fonseka alienated the premises by way of the Deeds

marked X4 and X5 to the Petitioner in this application. Prior to

this, the said premises were given on lease to the 2nd

Respondent by the widow of Marshal Fonseka together with

Srimathie Fonseka by the Lease Agreement dated 08.08.1973

marked X3. The 2nd and 3rd Respondents in paragraph 3 of the

statement of objections accept this. By X7, it is clear the 2nd

Respondent had recognised Srimathie Fonseka as his landlady

by depositing rent in her name in the Kolonnawa Urban Council

in the years 1993-1997.

Due to the 2nd and 3rd Respondents making structural changes

to the said premises, the Petitioner filed case No.DLM/155/13

on or around 30.08.2013 in the District Court of Colombo

against the 2nd and 3rd Respondents as Defendants, seeking a

declaration of title to the premises, ejectment of the Defendants

therefrom, and damages. The 2nd and 3rd Respondents filed the

answer on or around 04.06.2014. In the answer, the said

Respondents did not say they are the owners of the premises.

However, by an additional list of documents dated 03.07.2015,

the said Respondents disclosed for the first time a transfer of the

property by the Commissioner of National Housing to the 2nd

5

Respondent by an Indenture of Transfer dated 17.06.2015,

which has now been marked X20. The Petitioner says he was

completely unaware of the execution of X20 until it was

disclosed in the said case by the 2nd and 3rd Respondants.

The Petitioner has filed this application before this Court seeking

to quash the decision of the Commissioner of National Housing

to transfer the premises to the 2nd Respondent marked X18 and

the subsequent Deed of Transfer in favour of the 2nd Respondent

marked X20 by a writ of certiorari.

The Petitioner says when case No.DLM/155/13 was pending in

the District Court, he became aware the 2nd and 3rd

Respondents were attempting to obtain the premises through

the Commissioner of National Housing, on the purported basis

the said premises vested in the Commissioner of National

Housing by operation of law. Therefore, the Petitioner by X15

dated 03.03.2015, conveyed through his lawyer, informed the

Commissioner of National Housing that the premises did not

vest in the Commissioner of National Housing. Together with

X15, the Petitioner tendered inter alia a copy of the decree in

case No.2053/SPL, whereby the District Court held the premises

never vested in the Commissioner of National Housing. The

Petitioner also tendered a copy of the plaint filed in the pending

case No.DLM/155/2013, whereby the Petitioner asserts he is

the lawful owner of the premises. The Commissioner of National

Housing by X16 acknowledged receipt of X15 and requested the

Attorney-at-Law of the Petitioner to be present at his office on

06.04.2015 in order to come to a final solution regarding the

ownership of the premises. In X16, below his signature, the

Commissioner of National Housing has identified himself as

6

Commissioner of National Housing (Attorney at Law of the

Supreme Court). As an Attorney-at-Law, the Commissioner

ought to have known no further intervention by him was

required in light of the decision of the District Court in case

No.2053/SPL, delivered in October 1982, that the premises

never vested in the Commissioner of National Housing. The

Commissioner of National Housing had no right whatsoever to

hold another inquiry to decide the owner of the premises. The

Commissioner of National Housing manifestly acted ultra vires.

The Petitioner further says no proper inquiry with both parties

attending together was held by the Commissioner of National

Housing and no decision was served on him after the inquiry.

Be that as it may, X18 dated 25.05.2015 is the decision of the

Commissioner of National Housing, made pursuant to the

purported inquiry. By X18, the Commissioner of National

Housing says the Petitioner did not establish his title to the

property to the satisfaction of the Commissioner but the other

party (i.e. the 2nd Respondent lessee) perfectly did through

written submissions and decided cases, and therefore, the

Commissioner decided to transfer the title of the property to the

3rd Respondent who is the son of the 2nd Respondent. I totally

reject this line of reasoning. When a competent Court has

already decided in a case wherein the Commissioner of National

Housing was the Defendant that the property never vested in the

Commissioner of National Housing, how can the Commissioner

of National Housing thereafter purport to transfer the said

property to another? The written submission referred to by the

Commissioner of National Housing in his Order has been

marked X23. In this written submission, many Judgments are

7

cited but, regrettably, not the most important and most relevant

one, i.e. the inter partes Judgment and decree entered in case

No.2053/SPL. Nor has the Commissioner of National Housing

taken the said decree into consideration in arriving at the

impugned decision, despite the fact that he was given a copy of

it by the Petitioners Attorney-at-Law.

Learned Deputy Solicitor General appearing for the incumbent

Commissioner of National Housing candidly admits X18 and

X20 cannot be defended in the eyes of the law.

The 2nd and 3rd Respondents in paragraph 2(g) of the statement

of objections state for the first time that the decree entered in

case No.2053/SPL is per incuriam. They say this, in my view, in

passing. They do not pray for such a relief in the prayer to their

statement of objections. Although the 2nd and 3rd Respondents,

who were not parties to the said case state the said decree is per

incuriam, the parties to the action do not state so. There is no

allegation of collusion. In any event, a Judgment handed down

by a competent Court cannot be attacked collaterally, whether

by a party to the action or a third party. The 2nd Respondent is

admittedly the lessee of the premises under the predecessor in

title of the Petitioner (until perhaps X20 was wrongfully

executed). How can such a person challenge the Judgment

entered in case No.2053/SPL on the basis the decision is per

incuriam?

The gravamen of the submission of learned Counsel for the 2nd

and 3rd Respondents is, once the property vests in the

Commissioner of National Housing, the Commissioner of

National Housing can alter this status not by cancelling the

vesting by way of a letter, such as the one dated 05.06.1984

8

marked D, but by way of a divesting order published in the

Gazette, which has not been done in this case. This submission

is misconceived. The letter dated 05.06.1984 has no

significance. Although it is not necessary to do so, let me

explain.

After the declaration by Marshal Fonseka that the property was

a surplus house, the property vested in the Commissioner of

National Housing by operation of law. Thereafter, the

Commissioner of National Housing by R2 dated 20.03.1974

informed the 2nd Respondent that the property vested in the

Commissioner of National Housing effective from 13.01.1974,

and therefore rent should be paid to the Commissioner of

National Housing. The decree in the District Court case

No.2053/SPL that the premises never vested in the

Commissioner of National Housing (on the basis that at the time

the declaration was made, the declarant was not in a proper

frame of mind to make such a declaration)1 was entered on

14.10.1982. It is in this context the Commissioner of National

Housing sent the letter marked D to Srimathie Fonseka with a

copy to the 2nd Respondent (with reference to the letter dated

20.03.1974). The Petitioners case does not depend on this letter

at all. This letter is redundant. In accordance with the District

Court decision that the premises never vested in the

Commissioner of National Housing, there is no necessity for the

Commissioner of National Housing to subsequently cancel the

vesting. There is nothing to cancel.

The Commissioner of National Housing acted ultra vires in

conducting a purported inquiry and making the decision marked 1 Vide the proceedings dated 14.10.1982 in the said case, appearing at page 51 of X2.

9

X18. The Deed executed in pursuance of this wrongful decision

has no force or avail in law.

I unhesitatingly quash X18 and X20 by a writ of certiorari.

The 1st Respondent shall pay a sum of Rs. 100,000 as costs to

the Petitioner.

The application of the Petitioner is allowed with costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal