==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 22

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under and in terms of the Section 331 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 and in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka Complainant CA HCC 129-130/2020

High Court of Colombo Vs. Case No. HC 111/19 1. Christie Vivian Rodrigo

2. Dhammika Rodrigo

3. Jayaraj Amarasiri alias Jayanath

4. Jayanatha Rodrigo

5. Chintha Rodrigo

Accused AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Christie Vivian Rodrigo

2. Dhammika Rodrigo

3. Jayaraj Amarasiri alias Jayanath

4. Jayanatha Rodrigo

5. Chintha Rodrigo

Accused-Appellants Vs, Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. Respondent

Page 2 of 22

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran. J, Amal Ranaraja. J, Counsel: Nalin Ladduwahettiy, P.C. with Kavithri Hirusha

Ubeysekera, Rajith Samarasekera and Rajitha Abeysekera

for the 1st,4th, and 5th Accused-Appellants.

Moditha T.B. Ekanayake for the 3rd Accused-Appellant. Wasantha Perera, D.S.G. for the Respondent

Argued on: 19.02.2026

Judgment on: 16.03.2026

Judgment Amal Ranaraja. J,

1. The accused-appellants (hereinafter referred to as the first appellant,

third appellant, fourth appellant, fifth appellant, or appellants) have

been indicted in the High Court of Colombo in High Court Case No. HC

111/2019. The charges in the indictment are as follows;

01. That between the dates of 01st of November, 2012 and 30th of

October, 2013, in the district of Colombo, within the

jurisdiction of this Court, or in other areas unknown to the

complaint, you along with others, did deceive a certain person

by indicating that the above named first accused, was the

lawful owner of the premises bearing Assessment No. 18/2,

Aloe Avenue, Colombo 03 and did thereby honestly or

Page 3 of 22

dishonestly induce said person into paying money to purchase

said property, to commit offence of cheating, or abet the

commission of said offence, or conspired to act together to

commit said offence or abet the commission of said offence.

Since the offence of cheating was committed because of that

conspiracy, you have committed an offence punishable under

Section 403 of the Penal Code read with Sections 113B and

102.

02. That in the location, time, and course of action mentioned in

the first charge above, you, the first accused, did sign the Deed

of Sale for the aforementioned property for the purposes of

cheating with the intention of causing it to be believed that

such document was signed by or by the authority of the seller

of that land by whom or by whose authority, you knew it was

not signed; thereby you have committed an offence punishable

under Section 457 of the Penal Code.

03. That in the location, time, and course of action mentioned in

the first charge above, you, the second accused, did abet the

commission of said offence in the second charge above which

said offence was committed in consequence of such abetment;

and that thereby you have committed an offence under

Section 457 read with Section 102 of the Penal Code.

04. That in the location, time, and course of action mentioned in

the first charge above, you, the third accused, did abet the

commission of said offence in the second charge above which

said offence was committed in consequence of such abetment;

and that thereby you have committed an offence under

Section 457 read with Section 102 of the Penal Code.

Page 4 of 22

05. That in the location, time, and course of action mentioned in

the first charge above, you, the fourth accused, did abet the

commission of said offence in the second charge above which

said offence was committed in consequence of such abetment;

and that thereby you have committed an offence under

Section 457 read with Section 102 of the Penal Code.

06. That in the location, time, and course of action mentioned in

the first charge above, you, the fifth accused, did abet the

commission of said offence in the second charge above which

said offence was committed in consequence of such abetment;

and that thereby you have committed an offence under

Section 457 read with Section 102 of the Penal Code.

07. That in the time, course of action mentioned in the first charge

above, in Colombo, you the fifth accused, did fraudulently use

as a genuine document purporting to be a valuable security

which you knew to be a forged document or had reason to

believe was a forged document, to wit, a Deed of Sale bearing

No. 630 dated 1978.02.15 signed by Attorney-At-Law and

Notary Public Stanley D.P. Wijesinghe by whom or by whose

authority it was not signed and presented it to Abubakar

Padhmani Mohommed Illiyas; and that you have thereby

committed an offence punishable under section 454 read with

section 459 of the Penal Code

08. That in the time, course of action mentioned in the first charge

above, in Colombo, you the first accused, did fraudulently use

as a genuine document purporting to be a valuable security

which you knew to be a forged document or had reason to

believe was a forged, to wit, a Deed of Sale bearing No. 447

dated 1999.01.09 signed by Attorney-At-Law and Notary

Page 5 of 22

Public, Amaradasa A. Kodikara, by whom or by whose

authority it was not signed and presented it to Abubakar

Padhmani Mohommed Illiyas; and that you have thereby

committed an offence punishable under section 454 read with

section 459 of the Penal Code

09. That in the time, course of action mentioned in the first

charge above, in Colombo, you the first accused, did

fraudulently use as a genuine document purporting to be a

valuable security which you knew to be a forged document or

had reason to believe was a forged, to wit, a Deed of Sale

bearing No. 456 dated 1999.08.25, signed by Attorney-At-Law

and Notary Public, Amaradasa A. Kodikara, by whom or by

whose authority it was not signed and presented it to

Abubakar Padhmani Mohommed Illiyas; and that you have

thereby committed an offence punishable under section 454

read with section 459 of the Penal Code.

10. That in the course of action of the first charge above, you, the

first accused, did deceive a Public Notary named Kandayya

Neelakandan, by falsely representing to him that you are the

owner of the above property, and did thereby intentionally

induce him to attest a Deed of Transfer bearing the No. 2151

dated 2013.10.23, which he would not have done if he had not

been deceived. Thereby you have committed an offence

punishable under Section 400 of the Penal Code.

11. That in the location, time, and course of action mentioned in

the first charge above, you, the second accused, did abet the

commission of said offence in the tenth charge above which

said offence was committed in consequence of such abetment;

and that thereby you have committed an offence under

Section 400 read with Section 102 of the Penal Code.

Page 6 of 22

12. That in the location, time, and course of action mentioned in

the first charge above, you, the third accused, did abet the

commission of said offence in the tenth charge above which

said offence was committed in consequence of such abetment;

and that thereby you have committed an offence under

Section 400 read with Section 102 of the Penal Code.

13. That in the location, time, and course of action mentioned in

the first charge above, you, the fourth accused, did abet the

commission of said offence in the tenth charge above which

said offence was committed in consequence of such abetment;

and that thereby you have committed an offence under

Section 400 read with Section 102 of the Penal Code.

14. That in the location, time, and course of action mentioned in

the first charge above, you, the fifth accused, did abet the

commission of said offence in the tenth charge above which

said offence was committed in consequence of such abetment;

and that thereby you have committed an offence under

Section 400 read with Section 102 of the Penal Code.

15. That on or about 2013.10.23, in the course of action of the

first charge above, within the jurisdiction of this Court, in Deel

Place, Colombo 02, you, the first accused did, sell the premises

bearing Assessment No. 18/2, Aloe Avenue, Colombo 03 by

virtue of the fraudulent Deed document bearing No. 456 dated

1999.01.09 signed by Attorney-At-Law and Notary Public,

Amaradasa Kodikara and the fraudulent Deed document

bearing No. 2151, dated 2013.20.23 and signed by Attorney-

At-Law and Public Notary Kandayya Neelakandan, thereby

deceiving the Director of Lucky Industries, Abubakar

Padhmani Mohommed Illiyas, dishonestly inducing them to

deliver a sum of Rs.30,000,000/- to you; and thereby you have

Page 7 of 22

committed an offence punishable under Section 403 of the

Penal Code.

16. That in the location, time, and course of action mentioned in

the fifteenth charge above, you, the second accused, did abet

the commission of said offence in the fifteenth charge above

which said offence was committed in consequence of such

abetment; and that thereby you have committed an offence

under Section 400 read with Section 102 of the Penal Code.

17. That in the location, time, and course of action mentioned in

the fifteenth charge above, you, the third accused, did abet

the commission of said offence in the fifteenth charge above

which said offence was committed in consequence of such

abetment; and that thereby you have committed an offence

under Section 400 read with Section 102 of the Penal Code.

18. That in the location, time, and course of action mentioned in

the fifteenth charge above, you, the fourth accused, did abet

the commission of said offence in the fifteenth charge above

which said offence was committed in consequence of such

abetment; and that thereby you have committed an offence

under Section 400 read with Section 102 of the Penal Code.

19. That in the location, time, and course of action mentioned in

the fifteenth charge above, you, the fifth accused, did abet the

commission of said offence in the fifteenth charge above which

said offence was committed in consequence of such abetment;

and that thereby you have committed an offence under

Section 400 read with Section 102 of the Penal Code.

2. At the conclusion of the trial, the learned High Court Judge has

convicted and sentenced the appellants as follows;

Page 8 of 22

i. The first appellant has been convicted of the first, eighth,

nineth, tenth, and fifteenth charges.

ii. The third appellant has been convicted of the first and

seventeenth charges.

iii. The fourth appellant has been convicted of the first and

eighteenth charges.

iv. The fifth appellant has been convicted of the first, seventh,

and nineteenth charges

i. First appellant, first charge;

Has been sentenced to five years rigorous imprisonment

and fined Rs.10,000/- with a term of one year rigorous

imprisonment, in default.

Further, the first appellant has been directed to pay a

sum of Rs. 3 million as compensation to PW12, with a

term of one year rigorous imprisonment in default.

First appellant, eighth and nineth charges;

Has been sentenced to five years rigorous imprisonment

each, and fined Rs. 10,000/- each, with a term of one

year rigorous imprisonment each in default.

Further, has been directed to pay a sum of Rs. 1 million

each in respect of those charges as compensation to

PW12 with a term of one year rigorous imprisonment

each in default.

Page 9 of 22

First appellant, tenth charge;

Has been sentenced to a term of one year rigorous

imprisonment and fined Rs. 10,000/- with a term of

three months rigorous imprisonment in default.

First appellant, fifteenth charge;

Has been sentenced to a term of five years rigorous

imprisonment and fined Rs. 10,000/- with a term of one

year rigorous imprisonment in default.

Further has been directed to pay a sum of Rs. 2 million

as compensation to PW12 with a term of one year

rigorous imprisonment in default.

Further, the learned High Court Judge has also directed

that the substantial terms of rigorous imprisonment,

imposed on the first appellant to run concurrently, and

the terms of imprisonment in default to run

consecutively.

ii. Third appellant, first charge;

Has been sentenced to five years rigorous imprisonment

and fined Rs.10,000/- with a term of one year rigorous

imprisonment in default,

Further has been directed to pay a sum of Rs. 3 million

as compensation to PW12 with a term of one year

rigorous imprisonment in default.

Page 10 of 22

Third appellant, seventeenth charge;

Has been sentenced to five years rigorous imprisonment

and fined Rs.10,000/- with a term of one year rigorous

imprisonment in default.

Further has been directed to pay Rs. 3 million as

compensation to PW12 with a term of 1 year rigorous

imprisonment in default.

iii. Fourth appellant, first charge;

Has been sentenced to four years rigorous imprisonment

and fined Rs.10,000/- with a term of one year rigorous

imprisonment in default

Further has been directed to pay a sum of Rs. 3 million

to PW12 as compensation, with a term of one year

rigorous imprisonment in default.

Fourth appellant, eighteenth charge;

Has been sentenced to five years rigorous imprisonment

and fined Rs. 10,000/- with a term of one year rigorous

imprisonment in default.

Further has been directed to pay a sum of Rs. 3 million

as compensation to PW12 with a term of one year

rigorous imprisonment in default.

iv. Fifth appellant, first charge;

Has been sentenced to five years rigorous imprisonment

and fined Rs. 10,000/- with a term of one year rigorous

imprisonment in default.

Page 11 of 22

Further has been directed to pay a sum of Rs. 3 million

as compensation to PW12 with a term of 1 year in default.

Fifth appellant, seventh charge;

Has been sentenced to five years rigorous imprisonment

and fined Rs. 10,000/- with a term of one year rigorous

imprisonment in default.

Further has been directed to pay a sum of Rs. 2 million

as compensation to PW1 with a term of one year rigorous

imprisonment in default.

Fifth appellant, nineteenth charge;

Has been sentenced to five years rigorous imprisonment

and fined Rs.10,000/- with a term of one year rigorous

imprisonment in default.

Further has been directed to pay a sum of Rs. 2 million

as compensation to PW12 with a term of one year

rigorous imprisonment in default.

3. The learned High Court Judge has also further directed that, if the

relevant appellants have already paid a sum of money to PW12, that

those sums be deducted from the sum directed to be paid as

compensation.

4. The first, third, fourth, and the fifth appellants aggrieved by the

convictions, disputed judgements and the sentencing order have

preferred the instant appeals to this court.

5. When the matter was taken up for argument, the counsel for the

appellants including the learned President’s Counsel, informed court

Page 12 of 22

that the appellants would not be challenging the convictions, but only

the sentencing order. Thereafter, submitted the following grounds for

an adjustment to the imposed sentences;

i. The advanced ages of the first, third and fifth appellants

(eighty-nine, fifty-five and fifty-nine years old respectively).

ii. The appellants visible repentance evidenced by the decision

to contest only the sentencing order, and not the convictions

themselves.

iii. The appellants willingness to comply with the High Court’s

directive to pay sums as compensation to PW01 and PW12,

further demonstrating their remorse.

iv. The nature of the offences which are not grave and did not

involve the use, attempted use or threat of physical force

against another person.

v. There being no minimum mandatory sentence prescribed for

the offences of which the appellants have been convicted.

6. In light of these circumstances, it has been further contended that an

adjustment be considered in the sentences imposed upon the

appellants.

7. The learned Deputy Solicitor General has submitted that just and

proportionate sentences be imposed on the appellants.

8. In Asan Mohammed Rizwan vs. Attorney General, M.C. Pelmadulla Case

No. 33332, H.C. Ratnapura Case No. HC 25/2010, Court of Appeal

Revision No. CA [PHC] APN 141/2013 decided on March 25, 2015,

Page 13 of 22

Chitrasiri, J, has discussed a gamut of issues regarding sentencing,

stating the following;

“Sentencing is an important aspect in the administration of

criminal justice system. A sentence ranges from death penalty to

the mere censure in the form of good behaviour bond or probation.

There are multiple considerations relevant to the determination of

a sentence. The most important consideration is the seriousness of

the crime. Jurisprudentially, this position is persuasive despite

pragmatic difficulties associated with matching the harshness of

the sanction to the severity of the crime.”

“…Therefore, it is necessary for the judges to keep in mind the

objectives of sentencing and also the sentencing guidelines, in

order to arrive at the correct and appropriate decision.

Objectives of sentencing include the following:

(i) To punish offenders to an extent and in a manner, which

is just in all the circumstances;

(ii) To protect the community from offender;

(iii) To deter offenders or other persons from committing

offences of the same or similar nature;

(iv) To establish conditions so that rehabilitation of offenders

may be promoted or facilitated;

(v) To signify that the court and the community denounce the

commission of such offences;

Page 14 of 22

(vi) To maintain the required standards of societal

expectations in making decisions;

(vii) To prevent overcrowding prisons also could be considered

as one such objective particularly when it comes to

developing countries such as ours.”

“…I will now advert to the other aspects that are necessary to

consider before a sentence is determined. Those can be

categorized as follows:

(a) The maximum and the minimum (if any) penalty prescribed

for the offence;

(b) The nature and gravity/seriousness of the particular

offence.

(c) The offender’s culpability and degree of his/her

responsibility for the offence;

(d) Mental state of the accused at the time the offence was

committed;

(e) Evidence as to pre-arrangement for the commission of the

offence;

(f) The impact of the offence on any victim and the injury, loss

or damage caused as a result of the offence committed;

(g) Whether the offender pleaded guilty to the offence and if so,

the stage in the proceedings at which the offender did so or

the stage at which it was indicted;

Page 15 of 22

(h) The conduct of the offender during the trial as an indication

of remorse or the lack of remorse;

(i) Any action taken by the offender to make restitution of the

injury, loss or damage arising from the offence, including

his or her willingness to comply with any order for

restitution that a court may consider.

(j) The offender’s previous character, good or bad;

(k) Imprisonment should be used when no other sentence is

adequate;

(l) Proportionality between the crime and the sentence;

(m) Possibility of reforming the offender;

(n) To ensure consistency in deciding sentences;

(o) Presence of any aggravating or mitigatory factors

concerning the offender or any other circumstance relevant

to the commission of the offence.”

9. Incarceration can protect the public, affirm society’s moral boundaries

and deter future crime. On the other hand, it is a costly, intrusive and

an unequal sanction that can be imposed on a convicted person.

10. Deciding when a convicted person should be removed from the

community, therefore, demands clear principles that go beyond anger

or habit.

11. Incarceration is appropriate only when it satisfies two simultaneous

tests;

Page 16 of 22

i. When it advances a legitimate penal purpose i.e.

incapacitation (imprisoning offenders to prevent them from

committing further offences), deterrence, rehabilitation or

proportionate retribution (punishment), and it is better than

any reasonably available alternative.

ii. It does so without inflicting harm, i.e. financial, social or

moral harm, that outweigh the benefits.

12. Offender and the offence characteristics warranting incarceration are

a. Crimes of violence and predation

Offences involving lethal weapons forcible sexual assaults

or significant bodily injury nearly always justify

incarceration. The combination of high harm, public fear

and repetition risk, outweighs alternatives.

b. Chronic serious offending

Some offenders reoffend through lesser sanctions with

escalating severity. When largescale drug trafficking etc.

persists despite regular interventions, society is justified in

concluding that only incarceration of the person involved

will protect the community.

c. Threats to integrity of institutions

Public corruption, terrorism and major organised crime

undermine the rule of law itself. The deterrent need here is

acute. Fines alone would be perceived as licensing

wrongdoing.

13. Incarceration is usually inappropriate in the following situations;

Page 17 of 22

a. Nonviolent, first time or low-level offence such as shoplifting,

simple possession of controlled substances rarely require

incarceration.

b. Offences rooted in addiction, mental illness or poverty.

When the root cause is treatable, therapeutic or economic

interventions are more effective, such alternatives are cheaper

than incarceration.

c. Youthful offenders.

Adolescents have an increased capacity for change.

Community programmes, probation would better balance the

accountability of theirs with growth.

d. Collateral costs and equity considerations.

Incarceration’s true expense goes far beyond a prison’s budget

line. Families lose wage earners, children suffer developmental

setbacks and communities lose social capital due to

incarceration. Further, it could deepen racial and economic

disparities and feed mistrust in the justice system.

14. These matters must be taken into consideration when assessing

whether incarceration is appropriate or not.

15. At the same time, there are statutory provisions that govern the

sentencing of a convicted individual. One such provision is Section 303

of the Criminal Procedure Code Act No. 15 of 1979 which allows for the

possibility of suspending a custodial sentence.

Matters that are to be considered prior to suspending a custodial

sentence are stipulated as follows:

Page 18 of 22

303. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, on sentencing an

offender to a term of imprisonment, a court may make an order

suspending the whole or part of the sentence if it is satisfied, for

reasons to be stated in writing, that it is appropriate to do so in the

circumstances, having regard to-

(a) the maximum penalty prescribed for the offence in respect of

which the sentence is imposed;

(b) the nature and gravity of the offence;

(c) the offender's culpability and degree of responsibility for the

offence;

(d) the offender's previous character;

(e) any injury, loss or damage resulting directly from the

commission of the offence;

(f) the presence of any aggravating or mitigating factor concerning

the offender;

(g) the need to punish the offender to an extent, and in a manner,

which is just in all of the circumstances;

(h) the need to deter the offender or other persons from committing

offences of the same or of a similar character;

(i) the need to manifest the denunciation by the court of the type

of conduct in which the offender was engaged in;

(j) the need to protect the victim or the community from the

offender;

Page 19 of 22

(k) the fact that the person accused of the offence pleaded guilty

to the offence and such person is sincerely and truly repentant;

or

(l) a combination of two or more of the above.

(2) A court shall not make an order suspending a sentence of

imprisonment if-

(a) a mandatory minimum sentence of imprisonment has been

prescribed by law for the offence in respect of which the

sentence is imposed; or

(b) the offender is serving, or is yet to serve, a term of imprisonment

that has not been suspended; or

(c) the offence was committed when the offender was subject to a

probation order or a conditional release or discharge; or

(d) the term of imprisonment the aggregate terms Where the

offender is imposed, or of imprisonment Where the offender is

convicted for more than one offence in the same proceedings

exceeds two years.

16. When considering the personal circumstances of the appellants, it is

important to note that the first, third, and the fifth appellants are aged

89, 55 and 59 years respectively. Notably, none of the appellants have

been convicted of any violent offences or offences involving predation.

Furthermore, they have not caused any physical harm to individuals

as their convictions are solely for nonviolent offences.

17. The first third and the fifth appellants are first-time offenders which

underscore the lack of criminal history. In addition, the fourth

Page 20 of 22

appellant does not have any pending cases against him further,

emphasizing his compliance with the law.

18. Importantly, none of the appellants are currently subject to a

probation order or conditional release, indicating that they are not

considered a risk to society.

19. The appellants have chosen to challenge only the sentencing order,

demonstrating their willingness to engage with the legal process and

address the implications of their actions. It also reflects the sense of

remorse regarding the charges laid against them.

20. In a further demonstration of their understanding of the seriousness

of their actions the appellants are committed to compensating the

victims, PW1 and PW12 with substantial sums of money. This act of

restitution not only exemplifies their acknowledgement of the impact

of their actions but also their desire to make amends.

21. In summary, the personal circumstances of the appellants along with

their non-violent backgrounds first time offender status and

commitment to restitution should be taken into careful consideration

when assessing their cases. Their actions indicate a genuine desire to

rectify past mistakes and a recognition of the gravity of the offences

they have committed.

22. Second, imposing a non-custodial sentence would serve the interest of

justice and rehabilitation. Non-custodial measures are effective in

reducing relapsing and allowing individuals to maintain their ties to

family, employment and community.

23. By facilitating the appellant's reintegration into society, this Court can

promote accountability and encourage positive behavioral changes.

Page 21 of 22

24. Furthermore, the imposition of a non-custodial sentence will also

alleviate the burden on the correctional facilities, which are

overcrowded and under-resourced.

25. Accordingly, I set aside,

the terms of five years rigorous imprisonment each, imposed on, the

first appellant upon the conviction of the first, eighth, nineth, and

fifteenth,

the terms of five years rigorous imprisonment, each imposed on the

third appellant upon conviction of the first and seventh,

the terms of five years rigorous imprisonment each imposed on the

fourth appellant upon conviction of the first and eighteenth,

the terms of five years rigorous imprisonment each imposed on the

fifth appellant upon conviction of the first, seventh, and nineteenth

charges and,

substitute them with two years rigorous imprisonment each.

Such substantial terms of two years rigorous imprisonment each,

together with the term of one year rigorous imprisonment imposed on

the first appellant, in respect of the tenth charge shall run

concurrently.

I further suspend for five years those substantial terms of

imprisonment directed to run concurrently.

The fines together with the terms of imprisonment in default will

remain unchanged.

Page 22 of 22

26. The appellants are also ordered to pay compensation to PW01 and

PW12, as directed by the learned High Court Judge, subject to the

deduction of any amounts already paid to either of those victims. The

terms of imprisonment in default, shall remain unchanged if the

appellants fail to pay such compensation.

27. Appeal partly allowed.

I make no order regarding costs.

28. The registrar of this Court is directed to send a copy of this judgement

to the High Court in Colombo for compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Judge of the Court of Appeal