Page 1 of 8

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of section

331(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act

No. 15 of 1979 read with Article 138(1) of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Complainant

CA/HCC/0060/2024

HC Kilinochchi Case No:

NP/HC/KN/64/2022

Vijayaraja Vijayakumar,

No. 37/46, 1st Lane,

Brown Road, Jaffna

(Presently of Prison, Welikada)

Accused

Page 2 of 8

AND NOW

Vijayaraja Vijayakumar,

No. 37/46, 1st Lane,

Brown Road, Jaffna.

(Presently of Prison, Welikada)

Accused-Appellant

The Hon. Attorney General, Attorney

General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Amal Ranaraja, J.

Counsels: Neranjan Jayasinghe with Randunu Heellage and Imansi Senerath for

the Accused-Appellant

Jayalakshi De Silva for the Respondent

Argued On: 21.03.2025

Judgment On: 20.05.2025

Page 3 of 8

JUDGMENT

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

The Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant) and the 1st Accused who

was acquitted after the trial, were indicted in the High Court of Kilinochchi for being in

possession and trafficking of 143g of Heroin on 12.05.2018, at Peralai under Section 54A

(b) and (d) of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance No. 13 of 1984 as

amended.

After the Appellant pleaded not guilty, the Prosecution led evidence of PW1 and PW7 and

closed their case. The Appellant gave a dock statement. At the conclusion of the trial, the

Learned Judge of the High Court by judgment dated 18.01.2024 found the Appellant

guilty and sentenced to life imprisonment, and the 1st Accused was acquitted.

Being aggrieved by the said conviction and the sentence, the Appellant has preferred the

present appeal to this Court.

The following are the grounds of appeal as urged by the Appellant;

1. Evidence of PW1 and PW7 fails the test of credibility and the test of probability.

2. Prosecution had failed to prove the chain of productions.

3. The Dock Statement had been rejected on unreasonable grounds and the Learned

High Court Judge had shifted the burden of proof to Accused- Appellant.

The facts and circumstances of this case are as follows;

According to PW1, Dharmapriya who was the Chief Inspector of Police of STF Rajagiriya,

on a piece of information received by P.C. Tharanga, they had proceeded to Kilinochchi

and set up a roadblock at the Peralai Road to search a van bearing No. 255-4177. Then

the said vehicle was stopped by one I.P. Wijeratne and the P.C. Buddhika had switched

off the engine of the vehicle and took the key. According to PW1, when he opened the rear

Page 4 of 8

door of the van, he saw the Appellant seated in the van keeping a parcel on his lap which

was wrapped with a yellow colour sellotape. Thereafter, when he opened the parcel, he

saw a brown colour powder which he identified to be heroin through his experience.

Thereafter, the Appellant and the driver who was the 1st Accused were taken into custody

and brought to Palai Police at 18 hours.

According to PW1, the parcel was properly sealed and was entered in the production list

and later sent to the Government Analyst.

According to the Appellant, who made a dock statement, he had lend some money to one

Mohan Dias and had failed to pay the said money. Thereafter, he had an issue with the

said Mohan and he had asked the Appellant to come to his residence and on his way only

he was stopped and later the parcel was introduced to him by the police. According to him,

the van was shown by the said Mohan.

When we analyse the evidence of PW1, on information received, he had gone from

Rajagiriya to Kilinochchi. There were number of Police Officers near the check post and

the said van was stopped at the check post at around 4 oclock. When he opened the door,

the Appellant was keeping the parcel on his lap and waiting in the van. At a check post

when a vehicle is stopped and after seeing the Police Officers in uniform conducting a

search, will a prudent person having heroin in possession have it, throw it, or hide it?

It is highly improbable to believe that a person with heroin of 1kg would keep such a

parcel on his lap and wait when the van was stopped and searched by the Police officers.

Section 11(b) of the Evidence Ordinance reads as follows;

Facts not otherwise relevant are relevant

Page 5 of 8

(b) if by themselves or in connection with other facts they make the

existence or non-existence of any fact in issue or relevant fact highly

probable or improbable.

The primary issue for consideration in this appeal is whether PW1's witness testimony is

improbable. If so, the Learned High Court Judge failed to consider the test of probability

regarding the prosecutions version.

Probability, in the context of legal matters, is defined as follows:

According to Murrays English Dictionary, probability means "the appearance of truth or

likelihood of being realized, which any statement or event bears in the light of present

evidence."

Sarkar and Monohara, in their book "SARKAR ON EVIDENCE" (Fifteenth Edition) on

page 71, state,

"...probability is meant the likelihood of anything being true, deduced from its

conformity to our knowledge, observation, and experience. When a supposed fact

is so repugnant to the laws of nature that no amount of evidence could induce us

to believe it, such supposed fact is said to be impossible or physically impossible."

According to E.R.S.R. Coomaraswamy, in "The Law of Evidence Volume II Book 02" on

Page 1053,

"The test of improbability has been described as essential inconsistency. There

may be facts which may show it to be impossible or so highly improbable as to

justify the inference that it never occurred."

In Bharwada Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai vs State of Gujarat 1983 AIR HC 753; A.P. Sen and

M.P. Thakkar J observed that,

Page 6 of 8

Discrepancies which do not go to the root of the matter and shake the basic version

of the witnesses therefore cannot be annexed with undue importance. More so

when the all-important probabilities-factor echoes in favour of the version

narrated by the witnesses.

In Wickremasuriya v Dedoleena and Others [1996] 2 S.L.R. 95, on page 98, His Lordship

Jayasuriya J. observed that;

A Judge, in applying the test of Probability and Improbability, relies heavily on

his knowledge of men and matters and the patterns of conduct observed by human

beings both ingenious as well as those who are less talented and fortunate."

A similar situation with regard to high improbability was considered by Her Ladyship

Deepali Wijesundera J in Selvanayagam Carmel Jenova Vs. The Attorney General, CA

Case No. 107/2011 decided on 13.10.2021 and held that;

The grounds of appeal urged by the learned counsel for the appellant are as

follows. That the version of the prosecution is highly improbable and that the

learned High Court Judge had failed to apply the test of probability and

improbability in evaluating the evidence. The appellants counsel submitted that

it is highly improbable to believe that when six police officers were searching a

small house for the appellant to take address alleged to have contained heroin in

the pocket and put it in to a bucket. If the appellant took the said dress from the

clothes line and put it into a bucket as claimed by the prosecution this would have

drawn their attention to the dress which is not the conduct of a wrong doer. I find

this improbable. There are more than enough places in a house to conceal such

articles.

Page 7 of 8

When we consider the evidence of PW1, it is highly improbable that a person who was in

possession of heroin of more than 1kg would keep such a parcel on his lap when the vehicle

was stopped and searched by the Police officers.

Upon applying the test of probability and the test of improbability to the aforementioned

facts, it becomes evident that the evidence presented through the prosecution narratives

cannot be deemed credible.

The other point to consider is the rejection of the evidence of the Appellant by the Learned

Trial Judge. The Learned High Court Judge rejected the evidence of the Appellant on the

basis that the Appellant has the burden to prove the facts he has stated.

According to the evidence of the Appellant, they were going to the place of one Mohan to

collect money he had already lent. According to the Appellant, this parcel was introduced

by the Police which was given by the said Mohan. The fact remains that, the information

received was that heroin was transported in the said van. The check post was situated

close to the Police station. If so, what is the reason for the police to wait for two hours to

take them to the Police Station?

Our Courts have given the following guidelines with regard to the evaluation of the

evidence by the Trial Judge.

1. If the evidence of the accused is believed, it must succeed.

2. If the evidence of the accused creates a reasonable doubt in the prosecution case,

defence of the accused must succeed.

However, in the instant case, our view is that the Learned Trial Judge has failed to

consider the guidelines set out above.

As I pointed out earlier, there are reasonable doubts in the prosecution case. But the

Learned Trial Judge simply rejected the Appellants version without giving reasons.

Page 8 of 8

When we consider all these matters in entirety, we are of the view that the Prosecution

has not proved its case beyond reasonable doubt.

Thus, we set aside both the conviction and the sentence and acquit the Accused Appellant.

Appeal allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Amal Ranaraja, J.

I AGREE

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL