==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 6

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Section

331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.

15 of 1979.

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Complainant

CA Case No: CA/HCC/0102/24

HC of Tangalle Case No: HC/95/17

Vs.

Wijenayake Kankanamge Ranjith Kumara

alias Hichchi Mama

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Wijenayake Kankanamge Ranjith Kumara

alias Hichchi Mama

Accused-appellants

V.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant-Respondent

Page 2 of 6

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Amal Ranaraja, J

Counsel : Niroshan Mihindukulasuriya for the Accused-Appellant

Shanaka Wijesinghe for the Respondent

Written 12.11.2024 (by the Accused-Appellant)

Submissions 18.06.2025 (by the Respondent)

On:

Argued On: 27.01.2026

Judgment On: 25.02.2026

JUDGEMENT

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

The Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Appellant’) was indicted before the

High Court of Tangalle on two counts of rape committed on Wijenayake Kankanamge

Thilini and Wijenayake Kankanamge Dilini, who were twin sisters, and one count of grave

sexual abuse committed on Wijenayake Kankanamge Dilini, punishable under Section

364 (2)(e) and Section 365B (2) (b) of the Penal Code as amended by Act No. 22 of 1995.

At the trial, the prosecution led evidence from 7 witnesses, and the Appellant gave a dock

statement.

At the conclusion of the trial, the Learned High Court Judge by judgment dated

14.03.2024 found the Appellant guilty of the 1st and 2nd counts and imposed a sentence of

10 years of rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 7500/- and 3 months of rigorous

imprisonment in default. Further, compensation of Rs. 300,000/- was ordered to be paid

to each of the victims; in default, a term of 6 months of rigorous imprisonment was

imposed, and the appellant was acquitted of the 3rd count.

Being aggrieved by the aforementioned conviction and the sentence, the Accused has

preferred this appeal to this Court.

Page 3 of 6

When the matter was argued on 27.01.2026, the Learned Counsel called upon the Accused

to move to withdraw the Appeal against the conviction and canvass only the sentence, on

the basis that the Learned High Court Judge had failed to consider the mitigatory factors

when imposing the sentence.

It is well established that, in the process of sentencing, Courts are required to take into

account both aggravating and mitigating circumstances, together with the gravity of the

offence. At the stage of inquiry preceding the imposition of sentence, the Counsel for the

Prosecution pleaded the following factors as aggravating:

1. At the time of the offence victims were 7 years old, and the Appellant was 27 years

old.

2. The Appellant was a neighbour of the victims, thereby occupying a position of

proximity and familiarity.

Further, before sentencing, the Counsel for the Appellant pleaded the following factors as

mitigating:

1. The Appellant is unmarried and 41 years of age.

2. His occupation is that of a three‑wheeler driver, which is his sole means of

livelihood.

3. The Appellant’s mother is deceased, and his father is the only surviving parent,

who is in ill health.

4. The Appellant bears the responsibility of caring for his ailing father.

In the instant case, the said sentence or penalty prescribed by written law is found in

Section 354 and Section 364 (2)(e) of the Penal Code;

Section 354 of the Penal Code reads as follows,

“Whoever kidnaps any person from Ceylon or from lawful guardianship shall be

punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to

seven years, and shall also be liable to fine”

Section 364 (2)(e) of the Penal Code reads as follows,

(2) “Whoever—

Page 4 of 6

(e) commits rape on a woman under eighteen years of age; shall be punished with

rigorous imprisonment for a term not test than ten years and not exceeding twenty

years and with fine and shall in addition be ordered to pay compensation of an

amount determined by court to the person in respect of whom the offence was

committed for the injuries caused to such person;

Provided, however, that where the offence is committed in respect of a person

under sixteen years of age, the court may, where the offender is a person under

eighteen years of age and the intercourse has been with the consent of the person,

impose a sentence of imprisonment for term less than ten years.

Our Courts have considered that when the Learned Trial Judge considers the mitigatory

and aggravating factors, there is a duty cast on the Judge to give reasonable consideration

to such factors. I am mindful that the starting point of the sentence for this rape is 10

years.

His Lordship S.N. Silva J (as he was then) in the case of Attorney General v. Ranasinghe

and Others (1993) 2 SLR 81 had referred to the judgment of Kieth Billiam (1986) Volume

Criminal Appeal Report 347, where the Court had identified the following instances as

aggravating features.

“1. Violence is used to commit the rape.

2. A weapon is used to frighten the victim.

3. Rape is repeated.

4. The Defendant had a previous conviction of rape or other serious offences.

5. The victim is either very old or very young.

Further held that “where any one or more aggravating factors are present, the

sentence should be substantially higher than the figure suggested as the starting

point.”

In the instant case, the starting point for sentencing in respect of the offence is ten years.

Thereafter, it is incumbent upon the Learned High Court Judge to exercise his discretion

by striking a balance between the aggravating and mitigating factors relevant to the

Page 5 of 6

circumstances of the case. In the instant case, the Learned High Court Judge has

considered the following factors,

මෙෙ මෙපාර්ශ්වමේ කරුණු සැලකිල්ලට ගැනීමේදී විමශ්ෂමෙන් පැමිණිල්ල විසින් ඉදිරිපත් කර ඇති

කරුණු මකමරහි පැමිණිල්මල් අවධානෙ මොමු කළ යුතුෙ. මෙෙ අපරාධෙ සිදු කරන විට වින්දිත

තැනැත්තිෙන්මේ එනේ පැ.සා.01 මේ සහ පැ.සා.02 මේ වෙස අවුරුදු 7 ක් බව මපනී ෙයි. ඒ වන විට

විත්තිකරුමේ වෙස අවුරුදු 27 ක් වන අතර ඔහු තරුණු විමේ පසු වූ මහාඳින් ෙැනුේ මත්රුේ ඇති

පුද්ගලමෙකු බව ඉතා පැහැදිලිෙ. නමුත් මේ වින්දිත ෙැරිෙන් මෙමෙනාෙ ඒ වන විට 2 වසමර් අධයාපනෙ

ලබන ලෙ ඉතා කුඩා ෙැරිෙන්ෙ. මෙෙ නඩුමේ කරුණු මෙස අවධානෙ මොමු කිරීමේදී විමශ්ෂමෙන්ෙ

අධිකරණෙ අවාධානෙ මොමු කළ යුතු කරුණ වන්මන් එෙ කුඩා නිවුන් ෙැරිෙන් මෙමෙනාෙ එකෙ

අවස්ථාවක එක් වරකට එක් අමෙකු බැඟින් නිවමස් කිසිමවකු මනාසිටි අවස්ථාවක මෙෙ අපරාධෙට

විත්තිකරු විසින් මගාදුරු කරමගන තිබීෙයි. ඒ අනුව විත්තිකරුට ෙඬුවේ නිෙෙ කිරීමේදී මෙෙ වරමද්

බරපතල ස්වභාවෙත්, මෙවන් කුඩා ෙරුවන් සේබන්ධමෙන් මෙවන් බරපතල අපරාධ අනාගතමේ

කරන්නන් එයින් වළක්වා ගැනීෙ සඳහා සොජෙට පණිවිඩෙක් ලැමබන ආකාරෙට ෙඬුවේ නිෙෙ කළ

යුතු අවස්ථාවක් බව මේ අවස්ථාමේදී සටහන් කර තබමි. ෙඩුවෙ අඩු කිරීෙ සේබන්ධමෙන් කරුණු

සළකා බැලීමේදි ඔහුට මපර වැරදි මනාෙැති බව නිරීක්ෂණෙ කරමි. ඊට අෙතරව මේ වන විට ඔහු වෙස

අවුරුෙ 41 ක අවිවාහක පුද්ගලමෙක් බවට කරුණු ඉදිරිපත් කිරිෙත් සිදු කර ඇත.

...................

ඒ අනුව මෙෙ විත්තිකරුට ෙඬුවේ නිෙෙ කිරීමේදී ඔහු මෙෙ අපරාධෙ සිදු කරන අවස්ථාමේදී වෙස

අවුරුදු 27 ක් වීෙ ෙ ෙඬුවේ අඩු කිරීෙ සේබන්ධමෙන් මෙෙ අධිකරණෙ සැළකිල්ල ෙක්වයි. ඊට අෙතරව

ො ඉහතින් සඳහන් කළ ආකාරෙට මෙෙ විත්තිකරු විසින් සිදු කරන ලෙ අපරාධෙ සොජෙට ෙේ

පණිවිඩෙක් ලබා මෙන ආකාරමේ ෙඬුවෙක් ලබා දිෙ යුතුෙ ෙන කාරණෙ මකමරහි ෙ අවධානෙ මොමු

කරයි.

It is evident that the Learned High Court Judge has duly taken into account both the

mitigating and aggravating circumstances placed before the Court. I note that the

Appellant is unmarried and 41 years of age, earns his livelihood as a three‑wheeler driver,

and bears the responsibility of caring for his ailing father following the demise of his

mother. On the other hand, the gravity of the offence is heightened by the fact that both

of the victims were children of 7 years at the time of the incident, and that the Appellant,

being a neighbour, occupied a position of proximity and trust which he egregiously

violated.

The Learned Judge has carefully weighed these competing considerations, recognizing

the personal circumstances of the Appellant while also acknowledging the seriousness of

Page 6 of 6

the offence, the vulnerability of the victims, and the broader societal impact of such

conduct. In light of this balanced assessment, it is evident that the Learned High Court

Judge has correctly considered the evidence and imposed a sentence of 10 years of rigorous

imprisonment that is both proportionate to the offence and necessary to uphold the

deterrent function of the criminal justice system.

Considering all these aspects, I find no justification to interfere with the sentence handed

down by the Learned High Court Judge on 14.03.2024.

The Registrar of this court is directed to send this judgment to the High Court of Tangalle

for compliance.

Appeal dismissed.

I make no order regarding costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Amal Ranaraja, J.

I AGREE

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL