CA/HCC/462/17

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979.

Court of Appeal Case No. The Director General

CA/HCC/ 0462/2017 Commission to Investigate

High Court of Colombo Allegations of Bribery or Corruption

Case No. HCB/1952/2013 No.36, Malalasekera Mawatha,

Colomb0-07.

Complainant

Vs.

1. Abdul Nazar Mohamad Lafoor

2. Jayaweera Munasinghe

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

CA/HCC/462/17

2 | P a g e

Abdul Nazar Mohamad Lafoor

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

The Director General

Commission to Investigate

Allegations of Bribery or Corruption

No.36, Malalasekera Mawatha,

Colomb0-07.

Complainant-Respondent

BEFORE : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J

P. Kumararatnam, J

COUNSEL : Shanaka Ranasinghe, PC, with

Niroshan Mihindukulasuriya for the

Appellant.

Dilan Rathnayake, ASG for the

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 19/09/2024

DECIDED ON : 16/12/2024

CA/HCC/462/17

3 | P a g e

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) along with the 2nd Accused were indicted by the Director General

of the Bribery Commission in the High Court of Colombo.

Count 01 on the indictment was against the Appellant, that between

30.09.2011 and 06.10.2011, he being a Senior Assessor of the Department

of Provincial Revenue Eastern Province, a public officer employed for

assessing the overdue revenue taxes of Manel Stores in order to facilitate a

concession on the said overdue taxes, did solicit an illegal gratification of

Rs.25,000/- from one Rossiro Indika Ratnaweera which is an offence

punishable in terms of Section 19(b) of the Bribery Act.

Count 02 on the indictment was against the Appellant for accepting an

illegal gratification of Rs.25,000/- from the said Rossiro Indika Ratnaweera

for the purpose set out in Count 01, an offence punishable in terms of

Section 19(b) of the Bribery Act.

Count 03 on the indictment was against the Appellant for soliciting an illegal

gratification of Rs.25,000/- from the said Rossiro Indika Ratnaweera being

a public servant and offence punishable in terms of Section 19(c) of the

Bribery Act.

CA/HCC/462/17

4 | P a g e

Count 04 on the indictment was against the Appellant for accepting an

illegal gratification of Rs.25,000/- from the said Rossiro Indika Ratnaweera

being a public servant and offence punishable in terms of Section 19(c) of

the Bribery Act.

The sixth and seventh counts are against the 2nd Accused for aiding and

abetting the Appellant in order to commit offences mentioned under counts

No.2 and Count No.4 in the indictment.

After the trial, the Appellant was found guilty for all counts in the indictment

and the Learned Judge of the High Court of Colombo has imposed the

following sentence on the Appellant by his judgment dated 05/12/2017. The

2nd Accused was acquitted from the case.

For the 1st Count the Appellant was sentenced to 04 years simple

imprisonment with a fine of Rs.4,000/- subject to a default sentence of 04

months simple imprisonment.

For the 2nd Count the 1st Appellant was sentenced to 04 years rigorous

imprisonment with a fine of Rs.4,000/- subject to a default sentence of 04

months simple imprisonment.

For the 3rd Count the 1st Appellant was sentenced to 04 years rigorous

imprisonment with a fine of Rs.4,000/- subject to a default sentence of 04

months simple imprisonment.

For the 4th Count the 1st Appellant was sentenced to 04 years rigorous

imprisonment with a fine of Rs.4,000/- subject to a default sentence of 04

months simple imprisonment.

The Court further ordered the jail sentences imposed on Counts 1 and 3 and

Counts 2 and 4 against the Appellant to run concurrently with each other.

Accordingly, he was sentenced to 08 years simple imprisonment. Further, a

penalty of Rs.25000/- was imposed against the Appellant.

CA/HCC/462/17

5 | P a g e

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellants

preferred this appeal to this court. The prosecution had called 04 witnesses

and marked P1-14 documents in support of their case.

The Appellant had given evidence from witness box and called one witness

on his behalf. The 2nd Accused had made his statement from the dock.

the Appellant was present in this Court on the day of the argument as he

was on bail pending appeal granted by the High Court.

On behalf of the Appellant the following Grounds of Appeal were raised.

1. Did the Learned Trial Judge fail to consider the inter se contradictions

of the prosecution witnesses which created a reasonable doubt in the

prosecution case.

2. Did the Learned Trial Judge fail to consider the evidence of PW2 and

PW3 as per the guidelines laid down by your Lordships Court.

3. Has the learned Trial Judge failed to consider that the evidence of PW2

and PW3 creates a reasonable doubt in the prosecution case.

4. Did the Learned Trial Judge misdirected himself in wrongly evaluating

the dock statement.

5. Has the Learned Trial Judge failed to consider the defence in total as

required by law.

6. Without prejudice to the above grounds is the sentence imposed

excessive in any event.

Background of the case.

In this case the Appellant and 2nd Accused are employees of the Inland

Revenue Department, attached to the Ampara Provincial Office.

According to PW1, Indika Rathnaweera had run a business establishment

namely Manel Stores in Ampara town from 2014 onwards. As he did not

pay the turnover tax from 2010, some officers from the Ampara Provincial

CA/HCC/462/17

6 | P a g e

Tax Office had come to his shop and confiscated all relevant documents on

30.09.2011 and thereafter he was asked to come to the tax office on

03.10.2011. When he met the Appellant in his office, he was informed that

according to the income the Appellant generated, he was liable to pay

Rs.140,000/-. But the Appellant had demanded Rs.25000/- to re-adjust the

said amount to Rs.20600/-.This was informed to the Bribery Commission

and a raid was organised to apprehend the culprits.

On the day of the raid PW1 went to the Appellants office with a Bribery

Officer, who acted as a decoy and handed over the money to the Appellant in

presence of the decoy (PW2). When the money was handed over to the

Appellant, he had put the same into a file and handed it over to the 2nd

Accused. When the 2nd Accused was carrying the file the Bribery Officers had

arrested him in the office and recovered the money.

PW2, PS 19901 Ajith Kumara had given evidence and corroborated the

evidence given by PW1.

The Appellant denied the respective charges and made dock statement and

adduced evidence to show that he was arrested on fabricated evidence.

As appeal grounds 1 to 3 raised by the learned Presidents Counsel for the

Appellant are interconnected, I have decided to consider all those appeal

grounds in combination in this judgment.

In a criminal trial, it is incumbent on the prosecution to prove the case

beyond reasonable doubt. There is no burden on the Appellant to prove his

innocence. This is the Golden Thread as discussed in Woolmington v. DPP

[1935] A.C.462. In this case Viscount Sankey J held that:

Throughout the web of the English Criminal Law one golden thread is

always to be seen, that it is the duty of the prosecution to prove the

prisoners guilt If, at the end of and on the whole of the case, there

is a reasonable doubt, created by the evidence given by either the

CA/HCC/462/17

7 | P a g e

prosecution or the prisoner..the prosecution has not made out the case

and the prisoner is entitled to an acquittal.

According to prosecutions stance, the solicitation, which would constitute

an offence under the Bribery Act, was committed by the Appellant in this

case. According to the evidence led through PW1, he had first met the

Appellant at the Provincial Tax Office and inquired from him about his tax

liability. At that time the Appellant had informed the amount and solicited

Rs.25000/- from him to soft pedal the case. Hence, the Learned Presidents

Counsel appearing for the Appellant strenuously argued that leading of that

evidence is highly prejudicial and maybe inadmissible as it prejudices the

case for the Appellant as the money recovered from the possession of the 2nd

Accused was given to him by the Appellant to begin with.

Next, the Learned Presidents Counsel argued that the learned High Court

Judge had failed to analyse the entirety of the evidence presented by the

prosecution as it contained serious inter se and per se contradictions. He

further stated that the Learned High Court judge should have paid attention

to certain improbabilities and infirmities that surfaced in the prosecutions

case.

When a witness gives evidence before the court upon oath, he is expected to

tell the truth in a court of law. If the person gives contradictory evidence

opposing the statement, it is usually called a contradiction. It is the duty of

the trial judge to unearth the truth and to come to a conclusion whether the

Accused person is guilty or not.

According to PW1, after complaining to the Bribery Department a raid was

arranged. PW2 acting as a decoy had accompanied PW1, when he went to

give the money. PW2, the decoy had the money when the duo went to the

Tax Office. The decoy had given the money to PW1. PW1 had then given the

same to the Appellant and the Bribery Department Officers had entered the

office and recovered the money from the 2nd Accused thereafter.

CA/HCC/462/17

8 | P a g e

In this case the evidence presented by the prosecution is overwhelming. No

contradictory position existed among the prosecution witnesses. The

Learned High Court Judge had considered the inter se and per se

contradictions of prosecution witnesses and held that the prosecution had

adduced cogent, consistent, and believable evidence. Therefore, I conclude

that the grounds of appeal raised by the Appellant have no merit.

The Learned Presidents Counsel finally drew the attention of this Court to

the sentence imposed by the Learned High Court Judge. In this case the

Learned High Court Judge had imposed 08 years simple imprisonment

against the Appellant. The reason for imposing simple imprisonment is that

the Appellant was 58 years old (now 65 years) and had undergone a surgery

on his spinal code and need periodical medical attention. Highlighting this

position, the learned Presidents Counsel invited this Court to re-consider

the sentence considering the Appellants age and his medical condition.

It will fall upon the judge or the magistrate who will issue the final decision

in a given case to determine the appropriate sentence based on the severity

of the harm caused to the victim and the directness of the responsibility the

offender holds for the crime.

As such, the sentence that is imposed upon an offender should reflect the

crime and be proportionate to the seriousness of the crime that has been

committed. The weight given for each factor in a case is at the discretion of

the judge or magistrate dealing with that instant case.

In this case the Appellant was in remand initially and was under interdiction

from the date of offence. At the time of offence, the Appellant had put up 26

years service. A conviction under the Bribery Act would result in the

dismissal from the service. The Appellant had lost his employment benefit

due to loss of employment.

CA/HCC/462/17

9 | P a g e

In R. A. P. Ruwansiri Perera v The Attorney General SC Appeal 99/2006

decided on 21.06.2007 Sirani A. Bandaranayke,J. held that:

It is not disputed that the Appellant had been guilty of a despicable

act. Examining the circumstances of the case, both the High Court and

the Court of Appeal had in my view, taken into their careful

consideration the gravity of the offence. Therefore, if it could have been

implemented, there would not have been any necessary for this Court

to have considered the question of suspending such sentence. However,

as stated earlier, when there has been a delay of over 08 years for the

sentence to be confirmed due to no fault of the Appellant, this Court in

my view has a duty to consider such circumstances and consequences

that the Appellant had to encounter on account of such delay.

The Charge that had been hanging over the Appellants head over a

period of 8 years and the disorganization that essentially would have

followed due to the undue delay in confirmation of his sentence, in my

view are circumstances, although not obligatory, that should be taken

into consideration in suspending the sentence of imprisonment.

The learned Additional Solicitor General in keeping with the highest tradition

of the Attorney Generals Department informed Court that he is not objecting

for the re-consideration of the sentence imposed, as the sentencing is the

prerogative of the Court.

In this case as per the indictment the offences were committed in the year

2011 and the Appellant was sentenced on 05.12.2017. Further this Appeal

was taken up for argument on 19.09.2024. Considering the sentence

imposed and the time period taken finally, I think this is an appropriate Case

for the re-consideration of the jail sentence.

Hence, I set aside the sentence imposed on charges levelled against the

Appellant. Considering all the circumstances of this case, I impose following

sentence to the Appellant.

CA/HCC/462/17

10 | P a g e

1st Charge- 01-year rigorous imprisonment suspended for 05 years.

2nd Charge- 01-year rigorous imprisonment suspended for 05 years.

I am not imposing any sentence on 3rd and 4th charges, as those are

alternative charges to 1st and 2nd charges respectively. The fine imposed on

all counts and the penalty imposed remain same.

Subject to above variations, the appeal is dismissed.

The Learned High Court Judge is to comply with the provisions of the Section

303 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 1979 when the Appellant

is summoned before the High Court to convey this judgment.

The Registrar is directed to send this judgment to the High Court of Colombo

along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL