IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRARIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIS OF SRI LANKA

CA Application No. 178/2017 Writ

1

In the matter of an application under

Article 140 of the Constitution of the

Republic of Sri Lanka for a mandate in

the nature of Writ of Certiorari and a

writ of Prohibition.

Interagrocomplx Lanka IV. (Pvt)

Limited

PETITIONER

-Vs-

1. Madawa Wamakulasooriya,

Divisional Secretary, Akurana.

2. National Water Supply and Drainage

Board,

Galle Road, Rathmalana.

3. Gayantha Karunathilake,

Hon. Minister of Lands,

Ministry of Lands,

Mihikatha Medura,

1200/0, Rajamalwatta Avenue,

Battaramulla.

RESPONDENTS

Counsel

Before

N. Jayarathne for the Petitioner

M. Amarasinghe SC for the 1 S\ 2nd and 3rd Respondents

L.T.B. Dehideniya J.(P/CA)

Shiran Gooneratne J.

Argued on : 10.10.2017

Decided on : 19.10.2017

L.T.B.Dehideniya J. (P/C.A.)

2

The Petitioner filed this writ application seeking for a writ of certiorari to

quash the notice issued under section 2 of the Land Acquisition Act. The

learned SC appearing for the Respondents raised a preliminary objection

that the notice under section 2 of the Land Acquisition Act is not

amenable to writ jurisdiction.

The 1 st Respondent issued the notice under section 2 indicating that the

land in the area is required for the construction of Vilana U dagama

Service Reservoir for Kandy North - Pathadumbara integrated water

supply project of the National Water Supply & Drainage Board.

The learned SC argues that the notice under section 2 is for the purpose of

identifying the land and to consider the suitability of the land for the

proposed public purpose. It does not contain a decision and therefore it is

not amenable to writ jurisdiction. The learned Counsel for the Petitioner

submitted that even if the application for writ of certiorari cannot be

maintained, the application for writ of prohibition could be maintained.

The learned SC submitted the case of Dayaratne, Vs Rajitha Senaratne,

Minister of Lands And Others [2006] 1 Sri L R 7 at 19 where it has been

held that the section 2 notice is not amenable to writ jurisdiction.

I

tt ! Jt f , (f ! l i i

~ I! ! I

3

In the said case Marsoof J. considered several authorities and held that

section 2 notice is not amenable to writ jurisdiction. It has been held at

page 19 that;

In the instant case, the order sought to be quashed by certiorari is

the notice exhibited under Section 2 of the Land Acquisition Act

marked P 15. It is clearly not a decision or order which has force

proprio vigore. In the scheme of the Land Acquisition Act, a

Section 2 notice only facilitates an authorized officer to enter into a

land and determine whether such a land is suitable for the public

purpose for which the land is required. Thus the Section 2 notice

by itself does not affect the right of any person to his land except to

the limited extent of permitting the authorized officer to enter upon

the said land and consider its suitability for acquisition, which is a

very preliminary stage of the entire process. Therefore, if the

Minister considers that a particular land is suitable for a public

purpose, he directs the acquiring officer in terms of Section 4(1) of

the Act to publish a notice calling for written objections to the

intended acquisition, and after considering such objections, if any,

and the relevant Minister's observations on such objections, the

Minister has to decide in terms of Section 4(5) of the Act whether

such land should be acquired or not. It is thereafter that a written

declaration that such land is needed for a public purpose is made

by the Minister and published in the Gazette as required by Section

5 of the Act. It is for this reason that this Court in Gunasekara v.

The Principal, MRlGodagama Anagarkika Dharmapala Kanishta

Vidyalaya and Others(11) held that an application for a writ of

certiorari to quash a Section 2 notice under the Land Acquisition

Act was premature and thereby upheld the preliminary objec.tions

4

to that effect. As Shiranee Tilakawardena J. observed at page 7

and 8 of her judgment-

"Another matter that is relevant to this application is that at the

time of filing of this application the acquisition proceedings were

at an initial stage, and only notice under Section 2 of the Land

Acquisition Act had been issued. A notice in terms of Section 2 of

the Land Acquisition Act is issued when the Minister decides that

the land in any area is needed for any public purpose. The Section

2(1) notice is issued with the objective of making a survey of a land

and making boundaries thereon and to determine whether a land

would be found within its parameters that would be suitable for the

public purpose of the said Act. "

Justice Tilakawardene went on to hold in this case that the

application for writ of certiorari was premature in the

circumstances of that case, and should be dismissed in limine,

Similarly, in Lucian de Silva v. Minister of Lands. (12) and

Wickremasinghe v. Minister of Lands (13), it was held that steps

taken under Section 2 of the Land Acquisition Act are only

investigative in character, and that it is premature to invoke the

writ jurisdiction of our courts with a view of quashing a Section 2

notice.

In the present case also only the section 2 notice has been issued and

therefore this application is premature. The learned Counsel's submission

that he can proceed with the application for writ of prohibition is not

acceptable. The section 2 notice is issued to ascertain the suitability of

the land for the intended purpose and the party will have an opportunity

to present his case before the authorities prior to making the acquisition

order.

I uphold the preliminary objection and dismiss this application.

I order no costs.

Shiran Gooneratne J.

I agree.

President, Court of Appeal

5

Judge of the Court of Appeal