1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA (PH C) 56/2014 Colombo H.C. No. 72/2012

In the matter of an application for Writ of Prohibition.

B. Nandasulochana Perera, No.3212, Abeysinghapura, Periyamulla, Negombo.

Petitioner

VS.

1. D.D. Upul Shantha de Alwis, Commissioner of Co-operative Development and Registrar of Co-operative Societies, P.O.Box 444, Duke Street, Colombo 01.

2. Negombo Multipurpose Co-operative Society Limited, No.358, Main Street, Negombo.

Respondents.

NOW BETWEEN

BEFORE:

COUNSEL

2

B. Nandasulochana Perera, No.32/2, Abeysinghapura, Periyamulla, Negombo.

Petitioner - Appellant

vs.

1. D.D. Upul Shantha de Alwis, Commissioner of Co-operative Development and Registrar of Co-operative Societies, P.O.Box 444, Duke Street, Colombo 01.

2. Negombo Multipurpose Co-operative Society Limited, No.358, Main Street, Negombo.

Respondent - Respondents.

W.M.M. MaIinie Gunaratne, J. and

P.R. Walgama, J.

Mahanama de Silva with K.N.M. Dilrukshi for the Appellant

Chaya Sri Nanmuni, S.S.C. for the 1 st Respondent

K. Patabendige for the 2nd Respondent.

Argued on

Written submissions

filed on

Decided on

Malinie Gunaratne, J.

3

01.10.2015

06.11.2015 and 23.11.2015

28.03.2016

The Petitioner - Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant)

filed an Application bearing No. HCW A/O 7/2 0 12 dated 08.06.2012 in the

High Court of Galle, seeking a Writ of Prohibition prohibiting the 1 st

Respondent from declaring that the election of the Petitioner to the

Committee of the Periyamulla Pradeshikaya of the 2nd Respondent Society

on 19.11.2011, is invalid.

After considering the submissions made by both parties the learned

High Court Judge dismissed the Appellant's Application. Being aggrieved

by the said Judgment the Appellant has appealed to this Court against the

decision of the learned High Court Judge, praying for annulling the said

Judgment.

When this Appeal was taken up for argument on 01.10.2015, Counsel

for both parties made submissions in support of their respective case and

with the permission of the Court, subsequently tendered written submissions

as well.

The facts of this Appeal as submitted by the Appellant albeit brief, are

as follows:

4

The Appellant is a member of the 2nd Respondent - Respondent

(hereinafter referred to as the 2nd Respondent) Co-operative Society. On

24.08.2002, he obtained a loan of Rupees Two hundred thousand

(Rs.200,0001-) for which he mortgaged his property. He has stated in the

Petition that due to financial problems, instalments could not be paid

regularly. By letter of demand dated 20.12.2004, the 2nd Respondent Society

required the Appellant to pay the outstanding sum of Rupees One hundred

and seventy eight thousand two hundred and ninety (Rs.178,2901-) before

10.01.2005. Since the Appellant failed to comply with the said demand, the

matter was referred for Arbitration and an award was obtained against the

Appellant for the payment of the said sum of Rupees One hundred and

seventy eight thousand two hundred and ninety (Rs.178,2901-). Thereafter

the Appellant paid the aforesaid sum and got the Mortgage Bond released.

On 05/0112008, the Appellant was elected as a Committee Member of

the Periyamulla Pradeshikaya of the 2nd Respondent Society. While serving

as a member, on 02.04.2008, he was informed that he had defaulted in the

repayment of the loan and was disqualified to be elected as a Committee

Member.

By letter dated 23.05.2012, the 1st Respondent-Respondent

(hereinafter referred to as the 1 st Respondent) required the Appellant to show

cause, why a decision should not be taken under Section 60(02) of the

Statute No.3 of 1998 of the Western Provincial Council Co-operative

Society. The Appellant, by letter dated 05.06.2012, informed the 1 st

Respondent that he had settled the loan. It is averred by the Appellant in the

circumstances that he is entitled to invoke the Writ jurisdiction of the Court

to obtain a Writ of Prohibition against the 1 st Respondent, from declaring

5

that the election of the Appellant to the Committee of the Periyamulla

Pradeshikaya of the 2nd Respondent Society on 19.11.2001 is invalid.

In contesting the above suit by the 1 st and 2nd Respondents by way of

objections had stated the following:

As per Rule No.21 (e) of the Regulations of Co-operative Societies

and Article 22(i) (c) of the Registered Co-operative Societies Constitution,

any person who had defaulted the re-payment of a loan obtained from a Co-

operative Society for more than three months (03 months) continuously,

such person is disqualified to be elected as a Committee member of a Co-

operative Society. Therefore, the Appellant is not qualified to be elected to

the said Co-operative Society as a Committee Member.

When this appeal was taken up for argument on 01.10.2015, the

Counsel for the Appellant contended, that the main issue that has to be

decided is the interpretation of Rule 21 (i) (e) of the Co-operative Rules

1973.

Rule 21 (i) (e) reads as follows:

21 (i) A member of a registered society shall be disqualified from

being elected, as a member of the Committee of Management or of a

regional or a branch Committee;

(e) If he is, in respect of any loan received by him, in default, to the

Society or to any other Registered Society or to a liquidator, for a

period exceeding three months or is in default in any other respect to

that society or to any other Society or to any liquidator.

6

It is the stance of the learned Counsel for the Appellant that, the three

months period specified in Rule 21 (i) (e) is the period immediately

preceding the date of election. The Counsel contended that, the Appellant

has repaid the loan on 10.ll.2006 and he was elected as a Committee

Member on 05.01.2008. Hence it is about thirteen months after the

repayment of the loan that the Petitioner was elected. The learned Counsel

argued that, therefore the default disqualification is not applicable for life as

interpreted by the Respondents.

He draws the attention of this Court to Rule 21 (i) (d) of the Co-

operative Rules 1973.

Rule 21 (i) (d) reads as follows:

"if within the three years immediately preceding he has either been

convicted of any offence involving moral turpitude or has been sentenced to

a tenn of imprisonment of three months or more."

It is the contention of the learned Counsel that, even a person

convicted for a criminal offence is disqualified from being elected only for a

period of three years. Hence, it is the stance of the Counsel that it is

unjustifiable and unreasonable, a person who has defaulted payments; but

subsequently makes a repayment gets disqualified for life.

In the instant case the learned High Court Judge has held that the

Appellant who had defaulted in re-payment of a loan for a period exceeding

three months (03 months) is disqualified from being elected although the

loan had been re-paid as at the date of the election.

7

It is the stance of the learned Counsel for the Appellant that the

learned High Court Judge had completely misdirected herself in relation to

the interpretation of the above Rule 21 (i) (e) of the Co-operative Rules of

1973. Therefore, it is the contention of the Counsel that Rule 21 (i) (e) of

the Co-operative Rules has to be given a logical interpretation by this Court.

However, it is the stance of the learned Counsel for the Respondents

that, Section 21 (i) (e) is not ambiguous and therefore it should not be open

for interpretation. The learned State Counsel has contended that, the period

of three months is clearly a reference to a delay of instalments or the period

within which such money should be paid as stipulated and not a reference to

a period of three months preceding election.

Drawing the attention of the Court to the Local Authorities Election

Ordinance and the Provision 21 (i) (d) of the Co-operative Rules of 1973,

further the learned State Counsel has contended that the words

"preceding" has been clearly included in these Provisions, but it is not

included in the Provision 21 (i) (e) of the Co-operative Rule.

In tenus of the Local Authorities Election Ordinance a person "who

is serving or has during the period of five years immediately preceding

completed the serving of the whole or part of sentence of imprisonment ..... "

is qualified to be elected to a local body.

In tenus of Rule 21 (i) (d) of the Co-operative Rules of 1973, the

conviction for a criminal offence disqualifying a member to be elected

should be within three years immediately preceding the date of the election.

Hence, this Court had taken pains to consider whether there was any

obscurity and/or ambiguity in the wording of Rule 21 (i) (e).

.

8

Since the word "preceding" has not been included in 21 (i) (e) of the

Co-operative Rules of 1973, I am of the view, it was not the intention to

refer to the preceding three months and but a reference to three months after

the money was due. Hence, there is no obscurity or ambiguity in the

wording of Rule 21 (i) ( e) of the Rules.

Therefore, this Court has to give effect to the plain meaning of the

Rule. In doing so, this Court is of the view, that there is no ambiguity and it

is the literal interpretation in the wording of Rule 21 (i) (e), although it

seems to be unfair.

It is relevant to note, the Appellant has admitted:

(i) That he has defaulted the loan;

(ii) that he has not even complied with the letter of demand;

(iii) the matter had been referred for arbitration and the Order was

given on 07.11.2005;

(iv) he has only paid the outstanding on 10.11.2006.

Accordingly, the Appellant has admitted that, there was a clear delay

of more than three years. It is the contention of the learned State Counsel, in

the light of this and the clear provision of Rule 21 (i) (e), the 1 st Respondent

had no option but to decide that the Appellant's election is invalid as per the

regulations. The learned State Counsel has further contended that if there is

patent disqualification the Commissioner is empowered under Section 60 (2)

9

of the Co-operative Societies Law, No. 5 of 1972 to decide whether such

election is void or not. It is the stance of the learned State Counsel that, the

fact that the loan was re-paid does not detract from the disqualification since

there is no such provision to state that re-payment will qualify a person.

The Writ of Prohibition is used to prevent the exercise of jurisdiction

over a particular matter or dispute. It is to be noted that, the 1 st Respondent

has acted within his power vested in him and he has not exceeded the ambit

of his authority. Therefore, no Writ of Certiorari will lie and accordingly no

Writ of Prohibition can be issued as well.

Halsbury, Volume II pages 85 and 86, Simonds Edition in "The grant

of a Writ is as a general rule, a matter of discretion of the Court. It is not an

order granted as of right and it is not issued as a matter of course.

Accordingly, the Court may refuse the order, not only upon the merits but

also by reason of the special circumstances of the case. (Halsbury's Laws of

England).

On perusal of the judgment, it is apparent, that the learned High Court

judge has taken into consideration the submissions and documents filed by

parties and had come to her conclusion. As such, I do not see any wrong in

the manner in which the learned High Court Judge has considered the facts

and the way in which she has applied the law in this instance.

For the above reasons, I see no basis to interfere in the Judgment of

the learned High Court Judge. Accordingly, I affirm the Judgment of the

learned High Court Judge dated 25.04.2014 and dismiss the Appeal with

costs.

10

Since the judgment in this case binds the connected Case

No. CA (PHC) APN 72/2014, the Registrar is directed to file a copy of this

judgment to the said Case.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

P.R. Walgama, J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Appeal is dismissed with costs.