==== BLOCKS ==== 

WRT/0051/24

Page 1 of 13

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Mandates

in the nature of Writs of Certiorari,

Mandamus and Prohibition under and in

terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

C.A. CASE NO. WRT/0051/24

1. Balakrishnan Puvanenthirarasa,

Sopalapuliyankulam,

Salambaikulam,

Vavuniya.

2. Puvanenthirarasa Nirojeni,

Sopalapuliyankulam,

Salambaikulam,

Vavuniya.

PETITIONERS

Vs.

1. Mr. K.D. Bandula Jayasinghe,

The Land Commissioner General,

Land Commissioner General’s Department,

“Mihikatha Medura”, No. 1200/6,

Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla.

1A.Mr. Chandana Ranaweera Arachchi,

The Land Commissioner General,

Land Commissioner General’s Department,

“Mihikatha Medura”, No. 1200/6,

Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla.

WRT/0051/24

Page 2 of 13

2. Mr. M.A. Sothinathan,

Commissioner of Land,

Department of Provincial Land Commissioner,

Northern Province,

No. 59, Temple Road, Jaffna.

3. Mr. N. Kamalathasan,

Divisional Secretary,

Divisional Secretariat,

Vavuniya.

3A.I. Prathaban,

Divisional Secretary,

Divisional Secretariat,

Vavuniya.

4. Ms. S. Pathmalogini,

Puliyankulam, Vavuniya.

5. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

BEFORE : K. M. G. H. KULATUNGA, J.

COUNSEL : Sri Ranganathan Ragul, instructed by S. A. Kifsiya Banu, for the

Petitioners.

Dr. Peshan Gunaratne, SC, for the 1st - 3rd and 5th Respondents.

ARGUED ON : 10.11.2025

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON : 17.11.2025 and 27.11.2025

DECIDED ON : 02.12.2025

WRT/0051/24

Page 3 of 13

JUDGEMENT

K. M. G. H. KULATUNGA, J.

1. The petitioners are husband and wife. By this joint application, the two

petitioners are primarily seeking a writ of mandamus directing the 1st,

2nd and/or 3rd respondent/s to issue a permit under the Land

Development Ordinance or a long-term lease in respect of Lot No. 140

depicted in the Cadastral Map No. 950061, in favour of the 1st and/or

the 2nd petitioner/s. The said relief is prayed for by prayer (b).

2. The petitioners have also sought further substantive relief by prayers

(c), (g), (h), (q), (r), (s), and (t), as follows:

c. issue a mandate in the nature of writ of prohibition prohibiting the 1st and/or 2nd and/or 3rd respondents from issuing any permit or lease to any person other than the 1st and/or 2nd petitioners to the subject land bearing lot No. 140 depicted in Cadastral Map No. 950061;

g. issue a mandate in the nature of a writ of certiorari quashing the decision contained in the document marked “P-31”;

h. issue a mandate in the nature of writ of prohibition prohibiting the 1st and/or 2nd and/or 3rd respondents from taking any steps on the basis of the decision contained in the said document marked “P-31”;

q. issue a mandate in the nature of writ of mandamus directing the 1st and/or 2nd and/or 3rd respondents to issue/release the permit bearing No. VSTD/217C/Sobala/LDO/400, which was already made in the name of the 1st petitioner pertaining to the part of the subject land;

r. issue a mandate in the nature of writ of mandamus directing the 1st and/or 2nd and/or 3rd respondents to release the compensation of the 1st and/or 2nd petitioners which has been deposited by the 1st and/or 2nd petitioners in the Bank of Ceylon Account bearing No. 7041970 maintained in the name of the Divisional Secretary, Vavuniya, on the request of the Divisional Secretariat of Vavuniya to the 1st and/or 2nd petitioners;

s. issue a mandate in the nature of writ of mandamus directing the 1st and/or 2nd and/or 3rd respondents to act on the basis of the decision contained in the document marked “P-23”; and

WRT/0051/24

Page 4 of 13

t. issue a mandate in the nature of writ of mandamus directing the 1st and/or 2nd and/or 3rd respondents to carry out a proper inquiry pertaining to the subject land bearing Lot No. 140 depicted in Cadastral Map No. 950061.

3. The said Lot No. 140 is State Land. A large number of persons appear

to have been in unauthorised occupation of certain State Lands in this

area in Vavuniya. The petitioners submit that lands have been alienated

on permits to those who have been in such unauthorised occupation

and claim that the petitioners were occupying Lot No. 140, and thus,

the same be granted to them. The respondents do not dispute the

petitioners being in possession of some portions of Lot No. 140. In fact,

on one occasion, the Electricity Board has also deposited compensation

for trees damaged or cut in this land due to the installation of high-

tension electricity towers and wires. A part payment of the said

compensation is now being withheld due to the 4th respondent

disputing and claiming a part of the said compensation on the basis

that the 4th respondent was also in occupation of a part of the said land.

The respondents admit that permits under the Land Development

Ordinance (“LDO”) were issued to others in such occupation in that

area; however, as there was a dispute between the 4th respondent and

the petitioners, the issue of the LDO permit could not be proceeded

with.

4. The 1st, 2nd, and 3rd respondents have then conducted an inquiry and

decided to allot and grant permits to the two petitioners, as well as the

4th respondent, in certain proportions as depicted in P-30, the inquiry

notes and conclusion. This inquiry was so held by the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd

respondents or their respective agents on 07.06.2018 (vide P-30).

Thereafter, the then Divisional Secretary (the 3rd respondent’s

predecessor) has formally communicated this decision to the 1st

petitioner as well as the 4th respondent. The petitioners are now seeking

to quash the said decision communicated by P-31.

WRT/0051/24

Page 5 of 13

5. According to P-31, the said land was proposed to be subdivided into

three lots depicted as A, B, and C of the sketch in P-31. The petitioners

are now challenging this decision on the basis that the petitioners, by

themselves, were in actual possession and occupation and that the 4th

respondent was not in physical possession as claimed at the said

inquiry. The said Lot No. 140 is 3 acres and 14.4 perches in extent (R-

10). The petitioners are seeking a writ of mandamus to direct the 1st,

2nd, and 3rd respondents to issue a permit in respect of the entirety of

the said Lot No. 140. The relief so sought should be considered in

accordance with the legal regime and provisions of law prevalent as at

today.

6. According to the respondents, the maximum extent of state land that

may be alienated to an individual, in accordance with the prevalent

circulars, is one acre, in proof of which circulars R-4 and R-5 have been

tendered. R-4, issued by the Land Commissioner General, prescribes

matters to be considered when state land is alienated, especially to

unauthorised occupiers, and there are certain matters required to be

considered and followed. They are provided for by R-4. Then, R-5,

issued by the Governor’s Secretariat of the Northern Province, makes

provisions “Regarding the Extension of the Alienation of Government

Land.” The said Circular is dated 26.10.2020, according to which the

Governor of the Northern Province has specified certain limitations on

alienation of State Land, of which high land for agricultural purposes

is 1 acre, or if paddy land, it may be up to 1 acre and 2 roods.

The said limitation is provided for by the following schedule:

S.N. Purpose Area Extension

1

Residential

Urban areas 06-20 Perches

2

Areas outside urban

limits

01 Rood

WRT/0051/24

Page 6 of 13

3

Residence with

home

gardening

Areas outside urban

limits

02 Roods

4 Livelihood High land 01 Acre

5

Paddy field

Wet zone (rainy regions)

01 Acre and 02

Roods

6 Irrigation 01 Acre

7

Trading

Urban areas 20 Perches

8

Areas outside urban

limits

01 Rood

7. At this juncture, it is relevant to note that the 1st petitioner has been

earmarked to be issued with permit No. VSTD/217C/Sobala/LDO/400

but not issued due to the dispute with the 4th respondent. Similarly,

the respondents also reveal that the 1st petitioner has already been

issued with another permit previously bearing No.

VSTD/217D/Kovil/P/LDO/562 (R-6), in respect of 1 acre from a

different land. It is the position of the respondents that a person who

had already received land on an LDO permit is not entitled to receive a

second allotment or alienation of State Land on a similar permit, in view

of paragraph 3.4 of Circular R-4.

8. It is also averred on behalf of the respondents that the

Sopalapuliyankulam Rural Development Society has, by letter R-8,

confirmed that the 4th respondent’s mother has been maintaining a

portion of the said land since 1980. This has also been further

confirmed by the report, dated 26.12.2016 (R-9), issued by the relevant

Colonisation Officer.

9. The petitioner, on the other hand, claims that the petitioners together

were in occupation of the said Lot No. 140 for over 15 years. The

petitioners also claim that in 2013, the 1st petitioner was earmarked for

an LDO permit in respect of a part of the said land. Then, the petitioners

WRT/0051/24

Page 7 of 13

have also constructed a house and obtained permission to so construct

on 1.5 acres of the land in question. He also claims that the Electricity

Board awarded compensation in 2016; however, the 4th respondent has

then made a claim pertaining to a portion of the said compensation,

and the matter is still pending.

10. Similarly, in respect of Lot No. 140 too, the petitioners admit that the

4th respondent has made certain claims. But the petitioners’ position is

that the 4th respondent was not in possession of any part of this land,

and as such, submit that the decision to apportion the said land as

depicted in P-31 is unreasonable and not lawful.

11. The respondents did take up the preliminary objection that the

petitioners are guilty of laches. The petitioners are primarily challenging

and seeking a writ to quash P-31 dated 07.06.2018. This application

was filed on 23.01.2024. It is almost four years after the impugned

decision that the petitioners have moved this Court. No doubt, the

petitioners claim that after P-31, as parties did not agree, further

inquiries were scheduled for 30.06.2020. Then, the 1st petitioner claims

to have received the quit notice P-47, dated 20.10.2020, under the State

Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act. The petitioners claim that they made

subsequent representations and believe that the authorities would look

into the same. The petitioners also admit that upon the issuing of the

quit notice, an application to evict the petitioners was made and action

was instituted on 24.06.2022 in the Magistrate’s Court of Vavuniya

under Case No. 51664/22. This application for eviction is in respect of

only 1 acre as described by the Schedule to the affidavit annexed and

tendered to the said Magistrate’s Court (vide page 362 of the petitioners’

documents, annexed to P-49). The respondents have thus only sought

the eviction of the first petitioner from 1 acre of the 3 acres, and not the

entirety of Lot No. 140 of the Cadastral Map.

12. Accordingly, the sum total is that the petitioners, upon a delay of four

years, are attempting to impugn and quash the decision conveyed by P-

WRT/0051/24

Page 8 of 13

31. Several other steps, including the issuing of a quit notice and the

subsequent institution of the Magistrate’s Court application for

ejectment, have also been taken. Even if one assumes that P-31 is the

substantive decision and the other decisions are consequential, yet for

all, one cannot absolve himself of being guilty of laches or delay for not

coming within a reasonable time of the first-mentioned substantive

decision, where the unlawfulness alleged is.

13. It is trite law that unexplained delay is reason for a Court to reject

granting of the discretionary relief of writs. In Bisomenike vs. C. R. de

Alwis (1982) 1 SLR 368, Sharvananda, J. (as His Lordship then was),

observed as follows:

“A Writ of Certiorari is issued at the discretion of the Court. It cannot be held to be a Writ of right or one issued as a matter of course. The exercise of this discretion by Court is governed by certain well-accepted principles. The Court is bound to issue it at the instance of a party aggrieved by the order of an inferior tribunal except in cases where he has disentitled himself to the discretionary relief by reason of his own conduct, submitting to jurisdiction, laches, undue delay or waiver. The proposition that the Application for Writ must be sought as soon as the injury is caused is merely an Application of the equitable doctrine that delay defeats equity and the longer the injured person sleeps over his rights without any reasonable excuse the chance of his success in Writ Application dwindles and the Court may reject a Writ Application on the ground of unexplained delay. An Application for a Writ of Certiorari should be filled within a reasonable time.” I find the following dicta cited by Rajakaruna, J., in K. G. D. Walter

Abeysundera and another vs. Mr. S. Hettiarachchi, Secretary,

Ministry of Tourism and others (CA/Writ/371/2021, decided on

22.09.2021), also relevant:

“Now it is important to examine as to whether such conduct of the Petitioner and the delayed application for judicial review is reasonable. Lewis in Judicial Remedies & Public Law (4th ed.) says, at para. 9-17, that:

‘The claimant should challenge the decision which brings about the legal situation of which complaint is made. There

WRT/0051/24

Page 9 of 13

are occasions when a claimant does not challenge that decision but waits until some consequential or ancillary decision is taken and then challenges that later decision on the ground that the earlier decision is unlawful. If the substance of the dispute relates to the lawfulness of that earlier decision and if it is that earlier decision which is, in reality, determinative of the legal position, and the later decision does not, in fact, produce any change in the legal position, then the courts may rule that the time-limit runs from that earlier decision’” (at page 8) (emphasis added). “I am of the view that where the impugned action takes place in stages, the challenge should be launched against the earliest stage rather than the final and decisive stage. See R v Secretary of State for Trade and Industry ex p. Greenpeace) [1998] COD 59 and R (Burkett) v Hammersmith & Fulham LWC [2002] 1 WLR 1593 (HL)” (at pages 8-9).

14. In determining issues of this nature, what is relevant and critical is the

making of the operative order or determination; if a person aggrieved so

desires, such party should immediately take action to assail the same.

If such party allows time to lapse, and during such time certain other

consequential steps are taken which are independent of the making of

the first-mentioned determination, then the running of time as regards

the first decision cannot be stalled and would not be a valid excuse or

be explained thereby, so to say. Consequential action taken thereon will

not absolve the petitioners from being guilty of laches. In this instance,

the decision in P-31 is not directly connected or referable to the issuing

of a quit notice and filing for eviction in the Magistrate’s Court. In these

circumstances, the petitioners cannot rely on the subsequent unrelated

acts to justify the delay. Accordingly, I find that the petitioners are guilty

of laches or unexplained delay, which disentitles the petitioners to the

discretionary relief by way of writ.

15. The 1st petitioner has been the recipient of another permit under the

LDO, which was received by way of a permit bearing No.

WRT/0051/24

Page 10 of 13

VSTD/217D/Kovil/P/LDO/562 (R-6), 1 acre in extent. In view of

circular R-4, a person is not entitled to a second permit under the State

Lands Ordinance. It provides thus: “එම දිනයෙන් පසු දැනට අනවසරයෙන් ඉඩමක

පදිිංචි වී සිටින පුද්ගලයෙකු ඉඩම් කච්යච්රිෙකදී යතෝරා ගත හැක්යක් ඔහුට කිසිඳු ඉඩමක් නැති

පුද්ගලයෙකු නම් පමණි.” This disentitles the 1st petitioner to seek another

permit in respect of State Land. In view of the serious consequence of

being so disentitled, the suppression and non-disclosure of the previous

permit certainly amounts to a deliberate non-disclosure and a

suppression of a material fact.

16. It is established law that discretionary relief will be refused by Court

without going into the merits if there has been suppression and/or

misrepresentation of material facts. It is necessary in this context to

refer to the following passage from the judgment of Pathirana, J., in W.

S. Alphonso Appuhamy v. Hettiarachchi (77 N.L.R. 131, at pages

135-136), where His Lordship held as follows:

“The necessity of a full and fair disclosure of all the material facts to be placed before the Court when, an application for a writ or injunction, is made and the process of the Court is invoked is laid down in the case of the King v. The General Commissioner for the Purpose of the Income Tax Acts for the District of Kensington — Ex-parte Princess Edmond de Poignac — (1917). Although this case deals with a writ of prohibition the principles enunciated are applicable to all cases of writs or injunctions. In this case a Divisional Court without dealing with the merits of the case discharged the rule on the ground that the applicant had suppressed or misrepresented the facts material to her application. The Court of Appeal affirmed the decision of the Divisional Court that there had been a suppression of material facts by the applicant in her affidavit and therefore it was justified in refusing a writ of prohibition without going into the merits of the case. In other words, so rigorous is the necessity for a full and truthful disclosure of all material facts that the Court would not go into the merits of the application, but will dismiss it without further examination.” [emphasis added]. Saleem Marsoof, P.C., J., in Namunukula Plantations Limited vs.

Minister of Lands and others (2012) 1 SLR 376, held as follows:

WRT/0051/24

Page 11 of 13

“It is settled law that a person approaches the Court for grant of discretionary relief, to which category and application for a writ of certiorari would undoubtedly belong, has to come with clean hands, and should candidly disclose all the material facts which have any bearing on the adjudication of the issues raised in the case. In other words, he owes a duty of utmost good faith (uberrima fides) to the court to make a full and complete disclosure of all material facts and refrain from concealing or suppressing any material facts within his knowledge or which he could have known by exercising diligence expected of a person of ordinary prudence.”

His Lordship further held that,

“If any party invoking the discretionary jurisdiction of a court of law is found wanting in the discharge of its duty to disclose all material facts, or is shown to have attempted to pollute the pure stream of justice, the court not only has the right but a duty to deny relief to such person.”

Accordingly, I hold that the 1st petitioner is also guilty of suppression of

a very material fact and is not entitled to relief as prayed for.

17. The petitioners may have been in occupation of the land in question,

but there is material coming forth from the Land Settlement Officer, as

well as the Sopalapuliyankulam Rural Development Society, that the 4th

respondent and/or her mother had also been in occupation, at least of

a portion of this land. When considering the submissions and averments

of the petitioners, it is apparent that they have, at various times, for

various purposes, held out that they were in occupation of different

extents of land. At one point, it is said to be 1.5 acres, then 2 or 3 acres,

and now they are seeking a permit for the entirety of this land. This

clearly shows that the petitioners have not been in possession of the

entirety of Lot No. 140, as is claimed today; the 4th respondent has

certainly, either by herself or through her mother, also been in

occupation of at least a portion thereof.

18. In these circumstances, the decision of the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd respondents

to apportion and alienate the land between the petitioners and the 4th

WRT/0051/24

Page 12 of 13

respondent is neither unreasonable nor contrary to the available

material. This decision has been made upon hearing all the parties and

considering the reports and other information from the relevant

authorities and persons, and thus has followed the rules of natural

justice and considered the relevant material. Accordingly, I see no lawful

basis to disturb the findings conveyed by P-31 in the exercise of the writ

jurisdiction of this Court.

19. As the regulations stand today, there is an upper cap, or a ceiling, of 1

acre (high land) prescribed for alienation of State Land. The petitioners

together are seeking a permit/s, either jointly or separately, for land

exceeding the said limitation. Accordingly, neither are the petitioners

lawfully entitled to receive nor are the respondents under a duty to issue

permits in violation of the said circulars.

20. In the above premises, I find that the petitioners are guilty of laches and

that the 1st petitioner is guilty of suppression of a material fact. The

impugned decision P-31 is lawful and reasonable. Therefore, the

petitioners have failed to satisfy this Court of any lawful basis which

entitles them to the relief as prayed for.

21. The petitioners are also seeking a directive to release certain monies

paid by the Ceylon Electricity Board, which is now deposited with the

Divisional Secretary. As to the entitlement of the said sum, there is a

dispute between the 4th respondent and the petitioners. This is a matter

to be determined in relation to the entitlement of the land over which the

said high-tension wires have been drawn. To that extent, the entitlement

is in serious issue. Accordingly, when the facts are in issue and are

disputed, the petitioners are not entitled to relief by way of writ. In the

above circumstances, I see no basis in law or otherwise which entitles

the petitioners for any of the relief prayed for in this application. Further,

as it appears that the quit notice is in respect of the portion earmarked

to be allotted to the 4th respondent, there is no prejudice caused to the

petitioners either.

WRT/0051/24

Page 13 of 13

22. Accordingly, the application is refused and dismissed. However, I make

no order as to costs.

Application refused.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL