==== BLOCKS ==== 

Judgment CA Tax No. 24/2018

IN THE COURT OSOCIALIST REPUBL

C . A. Tax No.24/2018TAC. Appeal No.TAC/ESC/002

OF APPEAL OF THE DEM

LIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of a Casethe opinion of the CourUnder and in terms of Sof the Tax Appeals ComNo. 23 of 2011 as amenNo. 20 of 2013 of the Socialist Republic of Sri L

THE COMMISSIONER OF INLAND REVENUE

Department of Inland RevSir Chittampalam A.Mawatha, Colombo 02.

-Vs-

CARGILLS AGRIFOODS

No.40, York Street, Colombo 01.

APP

RESPO

2/2015

Page 1|23

MOCRATIC

e Stated for rt of Appeal

Section 11A mmission Act

nded by Act

Democratic Lanka.

GENERAL

venue, . Gardiner

LIMITED,

PELLANT

ONDENT

Judgment CA Tax No. 24/2018 Page 2|23

Before : JUSTICE M.CHAMATH.B.S. MORAIS

JUSTICE ANNALINGAM PREMASHANKER

Counsel: Deputy Solicitor General, Manohara Jayasinghe,

for the Appellant.

Dr. Romesh De Silva, President Counsel with N.

R. Sivendran, Attorney at Law, Fihama Haniffa,

Attorney at Law for the Respondent.

Written Submissions of the Appellant :-25.11.2025

Written Submissions of the Respondent :-27.09.2019, 12.11.2025

Argument :-16.10.2025

Decided on :-19.03.2026

ANNALINGAM PREMASHANKER, J.

A.

A1.

This is an appeal by the Commissioner General of Inland

Revenue (Hereinafter sometimes referred to as The

Appellant/CGIR) from the determination of the Tax Appeals

Commission dated 21.05.2018 made in TAC appeal no.

JUDGEMENT

INTRODUCTION

APPEAL

Judgment CA Tax No. 24/2018 Page 3|23

Q.N.1.

Q.N.2.

TAC/ESC/002/2015. The Respondent is Cargills Agrifoods Ltd

(Hereinafter sometimes referred to as The Respondent/Tax

Payer).

A2.

The Appellant being dissatisfied with the Determination of Tax

Appeals Commission (Hereinafter sometimes referred to as TAC)

requested for an appeal by a case stated for the opinion of the Court

of Appeal by their communication dated 19.06.2018.

A3.

In the case stated dated 04.12.2018 following questions were raised

for the opinion of the Court of Appeal:-

Whether the Tax Appeals Commission has acted

beyond its jurisdiction in determining the validity

and legality of an assessment whereas the proper

forum is the Court of Appeal (A.M. Ismail v. CIR –

SLTC Vol. 14 – Page 182)

Whether the TAC has erred in not distinguishing

between the differences of ‘Assessment” and the

REQUEST

QUESTIONS OF LAW

Judgment CA Tax No. 24/2018 Page 4|23

Q.N.3.

“Notice of Assessment”/ As the time bar limit is

applicable for making the “assessment” under

Section 163 (5), whereas the notice of assessment is

sent under Section 164 of the Inland Revenue Act,

No. 10 of 2006, as amended?

Mandatory v. Directory: Without prejudice to above

and on the assumption that the time bar is

applicable to the n Notice of Assessment, whether

TAC has erred in determining such requirement as

Mandatory whereas there was no any substantial

prejudice or injustice caused to the Tax Payer by

such delay in sending the notice of assessment.

B.

B1.

The Appellant concedes that the notice of assessment is sent 145

days after due date of the assessment that is 30.09.2012. Therefore

the assessment is time barred – out of time.

Fonterra Brands Lanka (Private) Limited vs. The Commissioner

General of Inland Revenue & another | S.C.Appeal

No.187/2014.

ACCEPTANCE 1

ADJUSTMENT

Judgment CA Tax No. 24/2018 Page 5|23

Further it is submitted by the Appellant that they are not

proceeding with the questions of law no. 3 that was raised by the

case stated. Therefore the rest of the questions are in respect of the

jurisdiction of the TAC (Question No.1), differences of assessment

and the notice of assessment (part of Question No. 2).

B2.

The Appellant concedes that the assessment is time barred. The

Appellant further concedes that-

a) The assessment in dispute is for the year 2010/2011;

b) The notice of assessment should have been made on or before

30th September, 2012;

c) The notice of assessment has been sent only on 18th February,

2013.

C.

C1.

Appellant allege that the Tax Appeals Commission had no

jurisdiction to determine whether the Notice of Assessment had

been sent after the due date, and the application if at all should

have been by way of a Writ challenging the Notice of Assessment

being issued after the due date. Court of Appeal cannot and has no

ACCEPTANCE 2

CHALLENGES

ANALYSIS

Judgment CA Tax No. 24/2018 Page 6|23

power to look into this question of the Case Stated with regard to

whether the Notice of Assessment has been sent after the due date.

C2.

Section 7(1)(a) of the Tax Appeals Commission Act No. 23 of 2011

(as amended) which reads as follows:-

"7. (1) A person who is aggrieved by the determination -

(a) of the Commissioner-General of Inland Revenue

appointed in terms of the Inland Revenue Act,

(hereinafter referred to as the "Commissioner-General"

given in respect of any matter relating to imposition of

any tax, levy, charge, duty or penalty under the

provisions of any of the enactments specified in Column

I of Schedule I, or Schedule Il to this Act; or

(b) ……………………

may appeal to the Commission in accordance with the

provisions hereinafter set out:.."

Thus, as per Section 7(1)(a) of the Tax Appeals Commission Act No.

23 of 2011 (as amended) if a person is aggrieved with the

determination of the Commissioner-General in respect to any

matter that person will be entitled to appeal to the Tax Appeals

SECTION 7 OF TAC ACT

Judgment CA Tax No. 24/2018 Page 7|23

Commission and thus, the Tax Appeals Commission is empowered

to look into any matter determined by the Commissioner-General

which the taxpayer is aggrieved with.

C3.

Section 8(1) of the Tax Appeals Commission Act No. 23 of 2011 (as

amended) which reads as follows:-

"8. (1) Any person aggrieved by the determination of –

a) The Commissioner-General, in respect of any

matter relating to the imposition of any tax, levy,

charge, duty or penalty; or

b) The Director-General under subsection (1B) of

section 10 of the Customs Ordinance (Chapter 235),

may if he is dissatisfied with the reasons stated by

the Commissioner-General or the Director- General,

as the case may be, prefer the appeal there from to

the Commission within thirty days from the date of

receipt of such reasons; or..."

Similarly, as per Section 8(1) of the Tax Appeals Commission Act

No. 23 of 2011 (as amended), if a person is aggrieved with the

determination of the Commissioner-General in respect of any

SECTION 8 OF TAC ACT

Judgment CA Tax No. 24/2018 Page 8|23

matter in relation to the imposition of any tax, that person may if he

is dissatisfied with the reason stated by the Commissioner-General

prefer an appeal to the Tax Appeals Commission.

C4.

Section 9(10) of the Tax Appeals Commission Act No. 23 of 2011 (as

amended) which reads as –

9.(10) “After hearing the evidence, the Commission shall

on appeal either confirm, reduce, increase or annul, as

the case may be, the assessment as determined by the

Commissioner-General or may remit the case to the

Commissioner-General with the decision of the

Commission on such appeal. Where a case is so remitted

by the Commission, the Commissioner-General shall

revise the assessment in order that it is in conformity

with such amount as stated in the decision of the

Commission."

SECTION 9 OF TAC ACT

Judgment CA Tax No. 24/2018 Page 9|23

C5.

Section 11A (1) of the Tax Appeals Commission Act No. 23 of 2011

(as amended) which reads as:-

"11A. (1) Either the person who preferred an appeal to the

Commission under paragraph (a) of subsection (1) of

section 7 of this Act (hereinafter in this Act referred to as

the "appellant") or the Commissioner-General may make

an application requiring the Commission to state a case

on a question of law for the opinion of the Court of

Appeal. Such application shall not be entertained unless

it is made in writing and delivered to the secretary to the

Commission, together with a fee of one thousand and five

hundred rupees, within one month from the date on

which the decision of the Commission was notified in

writing to the Commissioner-General or the appellant, as

the case may be."

Thus, the Tax Appeals Commission is statutorily empowered to and

it is obliged to state a case on any question of law for the opinion of

the Court of Appeal if the taxpayer or the Commissioner-General of

Inland Revenue makes such a request.

SECTION 11 OF TAC ACT

Judgment CA Tax No. 24/2018 Page 10|23

Thus, any question of law pertaining to the legality of the

Assessment can be raised before the Tax Appeals Commission and

the Tax Appeals Commission is empowered and is obliged to state a

case on any question of law pertaining to the legality of the

Assessment.

C6.

Thus, the Tax Appeals Commission according to Section 9(10) of the

Tax Appeals Commission Act No. 23 of 2011 (as amended) has the

power to annul, nullify. abolish and cancel the Assessment and

in order to do so the Tax Appeals Commission is empowered to look

into the questions of law pertaining to the validity and legality of the

Assessment since without looking into the questions of law the

Assessment cannot be annulled.

Thus, it is clearly evident that the legislature has intended to

empower the Tax Appeals Commission to determine matters on the

questions of law raised without going into the merits of the matter.

The Appellant urge the Court to determine the Question of Law one

that the Tax Appeals Commission in an Appeal process has no

power to determine the validity and the legality of the assessment.

This contention is also erroneous as the Tax Appeals Commission

POWER OF TAC

Judgment CA Tax No. 24/2018 Page 11|23

in determining on the Assessment, Notice of Assessment,

determination of the Assessor and the determination of the

Commissioner General is clothed with Jurisdiction and entitled to

determine all matters that have been referred to the Tax Appeals

Commission in relation to the Assessment.

C7.

In view of the acceptance that the Assessment has been made 140

days after it was due.

Fonterra Brands Lanka (Private) Limited vs. The

Commissioner General & another |S.C.Appeal No.187/2014.

His Lordship Justice S.Thurairajah held;

“These authorities read together, I hold that an

"assessment" is not complete until it is communicated to

the taxpayer by a notice of assessment served within the

time limit. The statutory time bar applies to the

assessment as a whole, including notice. A letter of

intimation is not an assessment, nor is it an internal

departmental calculation.”

FONTERRA JUDGMENT 1

Judgment CA Tax No. 24/2018 Page 12|23

“The Department's shifting positions, sometimes treating

'P4' as an intimation, sometimes as an assessment,

sometimes asserting an internal making, only reveal the

absence of a lawful assessment within time. To permit

such evasions would be to drain Section 134(5) of

meaning and to expose taxpayers to uncertainty and

unfairness. Parliament has not given the Department an

indefinite license to assess at leisure. It has given three

years, no more. The Department must act, and must

notify, within that time.”

As per the above judgment, making an assessment and send a

notice of assessment and receiving the notice, are all one process.

Therefore, distinguishing the assessment and the notices do not

arise.

C8.

There is a wider principle at stake, as I noted earlier.

Taxation is a compulsory exaction backed by the coercive

power of the State. It is therefore imperative that the

power to tax be exercised strictly in accordance with law,

and within the boundaries the legislature has drawn.

Time bars in tax law are not technical traps for the

FONTERRA JUDGMENT 2

Judgment CA Tax No. 24/2018 Page 13|23

Department; they are jurisdictional limits imposed in the

interests of certainty, fairness, and discipline.

To erode them by accepting secret assessments or

delayed notices would be to unsettle commercial life and

to undermine confidence in the rule of law. The letter

dated 25" March 2008 was not an assessment. The notice

dated 11" June 2008 was issued without jurisdiction. The

power to assess expired on the 31% March 2008 and

could not be revived thereafter.

C9.

An assessment is not validly "made" unless it is notified

to the taxpayer within the statutory time limit, and that

a letter of intimation does not amount to such

notification.

The assessment in this case, served only in June 2008,

was issued after the expiry of the three-year period

prescribed by section 134(5), and is therefore a nullity.

Thus, it is a well-established principle of law that it is

mandatory that the Notice of Assessment should be

FONTERRA JUDGMENT 3

Judgment CA Tax No. 24/2018 Page 14|23

served within the time limit. Thus, in view of the

admission that the assessment had been issued 140 days

after the due date the assessment is bad in law and is a

nullity.

C10.

It is well settled principle of law that the Court of Appeal has

jurisdiction and power to determine the questions of law submitted

and all questions of law arising out of the case stated.

C11.

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue Vs Cargills Quality

Dairies (Pvt) Ltd SC/SPL LA/No. 82/2022 His Lordship Justice

Janak De Silva, held;

"Section 11A(6) of the Tax Appeals Commission Act as

amended empowers two or more Judges of the Court of

Appeal to hear and determine any question of law arising

on the Case Stated. Accordingly, it is clear that the

questions of law that can be argued before the Court of

Appeal is not limited to the questions of law sent by the

Tax Appeals Commission but can include questions of law

POWER OF COURT OF APPEAL

CASE REFERENCE 1

Judgment CA Tax No. 24/2018 Page 15|23

arising from the Case Stated which the Court may frame

before the argument is taken up ex mero motu or on the

application of any one of the parties."

C12.

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue Vs United Motors

Lanka PLC CA Tax No. 25/2018 His Lordship Justice Dr. Ruwan

Fernando, held;

“The Respondent's argument that the jurisdiction of the

Court of Appeal is exclusively laid down in section 11A(6)

is based on the words in section 11A(6) "....any question

of law arising on the stated case and may, in accordance

with the decision of Court upon such question, confirm,

reduce, increase, or annul the assessment...". The

Respondent argues that those words show that the

question of law shall pertain to the substantive matters

of the assessment. The Respondent's argument is that the

words "confirm, reduce, increase or annul the assessment

determined by the commission" necessarily restricts the

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal to the determination of

CASE REFERENCE 2

Judgment CA Tax No. 24/2018 Page 16|23

substantive matters of the assessment. I am not inclined

to agree with this argument of the Respondent.

First, the words in the first part of section 11A(6) "Any

two or more Judges of the Court of Appeal may hear and

determine any question of law arising on the stated

case", is consistent with position in section 1IA(1) that

the questions of law arise on a case stated, and the Court

of Appeal can answer any question of law arising on the

case stated. !! the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal is

restricted to the substantive matters of the assessment as

contended by the Respondent, there was no need for the

legislature to use the words that the Court of Appeal

"may hear and determine any question of law arising on

the stated case", and it could have easily used the words

"arising on the assessment determined by the

Commission.”

C13.

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue Vs Cargills Food

Services (Prt) Ltd CA Tax No.15/2015 His Lordship Justice

Dr.Ruwan Fernando, held;

CASE REFERENCE 3

Judgment CA Tax No. 24/2018 Page 17|23

“There is nothing to indicate in section 11A(1) either

expressly or impliedly that the remedy by way of case

stated is limited to the determination made by the TAC

on the tax issue. The Respondent has failed to convince

us that the right of an Appellant to make an application

requiring the Commission to state a case on a question of

law for the opinion of this Court is limited to the

substantive matters of the assessment."

"The Respondent relies on the above passage of the SC

judgment referring to the passage "the Court of Appeal

must answer all the questions of law, if answering the

said questions may result in confirmation, reduction,

increasing or annulling the assessment determined by

the commission." The Respondent, however, disregards

the Supreme Court's own reliance on the judgment in

Commissioner of Income Tax v. Saverimuttu Reddy

(supra), which held that the Court is not precluded from

considering any point upon which the actual decision of

the Board might be upheld. It is a clear statement by the

judges in Commissioner of Income Tax v. Saverimuttu

Reddy (supra) that the Court of Appeal has jurisdiction to

Judgment CA Tax No. 24/2018 Page 18|23

hear and determine any question of law, not even raised

before the TAC, upon which the actual decision of the

TAC might be either upheld, no matter what might have

been their reasons for arriving at that decision."

In the Case Stated Question of Law No.1 the Appellant has sought

to challenge the jurisdiction of the Tax Appeals Commission to hear

and determine the appeal in determining the validity and legality of

an assessment.

It was contended by the Appellant that the Tax Appeals

Commission did not have jurisdiction to inquire into the question of

time bar of the assessment.

The totality of the judgment taken into account recognizes the

Court of Appeal looking into any question posed to the Court of

Appeal upon tax Case Stated.

C14.

The power of Tax Appeals Commission to annul the Assessment has

been clearly acknowledged in the landmark case of A.M.Ismail Vs.

Commissioner of Inland Revenue IV Tax Cases in quashing and

setting aside the Notice of Assessment his Lordship Justice Abdul

Cader, held:-

CASE REFERENCE 4

Judgment CA Tax No. 24/2018 Page 19|23

"It has power to review or annul an assessment if it is

proved that an assessee was not liable to pay the tax

charged"

If the Notice of Assessment is erroneous, invalid and bad in law the

taxpayer will not be able to pay the tax charged and in that case,

the power in a tax appeal process to annul the Assessment has

been recognized in the above case of A.M.Ismail Vs. Commissioner

of Inland Revenue.

This case itself shows that the first question of law raised by the

Appellant is incorrect in law and ought to be answered in favor of

the Respondent.

C15.

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue Vs United Motors

Lanka PLC CA Tax No. 25/2018 wherein it is specifically held that

time bar objections can be taken up in the appeal process:-

"[93] It is not in dispute that the TAC has got authority to

rule on its own jurisdiction, including ruling on any

objection with respect to the existence or validity of the

assessment, in addition to substantive matters of the

assessment. If a jurisdictional question or the extent

thereof is disputed before a tribunal, the tribunal must

CASE REFERENCE 5

Judgment CA Tax No. 24/2018 Page 20|23

necessarily decide it unless the statute provides

otherwise.

“[94] Only when a question of law or mixed question of

facts and law is decided by the TAC, the Court of Appeal

can exercise its power, either of appeal by way of case

stated, or in an appropriate case, by way of judicial

review. The TAC, having regard to the scheme of the TAC

Act, has jurisdiction to rule on the facts and law,

including whether reasons were given and communicated

to the assessee or whether the assessment is time barred

or not, unless the TAC Act provides otherwise.”

C16.

CGIR Vs. Classic Travels (Pvt) Ltd |S.C Appeal 158/2018

His Lordship Justice B. P. Aluwihare, held,

"If the legislature intended the jurisdiction of the TAC to

be limited to only review of the substantive matter of the

assessment, why would the Legislature in Section 8(1X(a)

allow an appeal to the TAC in respect of 'any matter

relating to the imposition of any tax, levy charge, duty,

CASE REFERENCE 6

Judgment CA Tax No. 24/2018 Page 21|23

or penalty of the Commissioner - General? The rational

conclusion that could be drawn is that the Legislature

never intended to limit the jurisdiction of the TAC only to

substantive issues.”

“Applying the principles above, the interpretation

advanced by the Appellant is evidently contrary to a

harmonious interpretation, since that interpretation

ignores Section 8(1)(a) of the Act, thereby resulting in a

conflict of the two provisions, as Section 8(1)(a) explicitly

provides an appellant the ability to canvass 'any matter

relating to the imposition of any tax, levy, charge, duty or

penalty by the Commissioner - General before the TAC. In

my view an interpretation stating that the TAC's

jurisdiction is limited to substantive tax matters results in

an inconsistency between the provisions.

C17.

The Commissioner of General of Inland Revenue v. Cargills

Food Service (Pvt) Ltd CA/TAX 0013/2016 His Lordship Justice

Dr.Ruwan Fernando held,

CASE REFERENCE 7

Judgment CA Tax No. 24/2018 Page 22|23

"It is relevant to note that a party has no absolute right

in a judicial remedy where an inferior tribunal exceeds

its jurisdiction, and where the absence or excess of

jurisdiction is not apparent on the face of the

proceedings. It is only discretionary, and depends on

various other circumstances, such as laches, or

misconduct, misrepresentation or nondisclosure of facts

and acquiescence etc. The grant of a writ is always

discretionary and is never demandable of right like in a

case stated in terms of section 11A (1)"

Thus, there is no merit in the contention of the Appellant.

D.

For the reasons adumbrated above, the questions of law are

answered as follows;

Q.N.1. No.

Q.N.2. No.

ANSWERS TO THE QUESTIONS OF LAW

Judgment CA Tax No. 24/2018 Page 23|23

E.

As analyzed above and as the two questions raised in the case

stated are answered in negative, the determination of the TAC

dated 25. 03. 2024 is affirmed and the appeal is dismissed.

The Appeal is dismissed. But considering the circumstances of

the case no cost is ordered.

The Registrar is directed to forward a copy of the judgment to the

Tax appeal commission.

On this 19th day of March 2026

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

M. C. B. S. MORAIS

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

CONCLUSION