==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0059/2013

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT

Court of Appeal No:

CA/HCC/0059/2013 1. Palihewage Lalithchandra Perera

High Court of Panadura 2. Panadura Acharige Don Jayasiri

Case No: HC/1359/1999

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

Panadura Acharige Don Jayasiri

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

CA/HCC/0059/2013

2 | P a g e

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Saliya Peiris, P.C. with Pasindu

Thilakarathna and Varuna de Seram for

the Appellant.

Dishna Warnakula, DSG for the

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 23/09/2025 and 30/09/2025

DECIDED ON : 11/11/2025

******************************

CA/HCC/0059/2013

3 | P a g e

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) along with the 1st Accused were indicted jointly in the High Court

of Panadura as follows:

1. On or about 17.08.1994 at Rambukkana, committing the murder of

Willora Arachchige Pemanis Perera, an offence punishable under

Section 296 read with Section 32 of the Penal Code.

2. In the course of the same transaction at Rambukkana, committing

the murder of Willora Arachchige Samanthi Perera, an offence

punishable under Section 296 read with Section 32 of the Penal Code.

3. In the course of the same transaction at Rambukkana, committing

the offence of attempted murder of Ambawalage Siriyawathi, an

offence punishable under Section 300 read with Section 32 of the

Penal Code.

4. In the course of the same transaction at Rambukkana, committing

mischief to the house of Ambawalage Siriyawathi, an offence

punishable under Section 419 read with Section 32 of the Penal Code.

This matter was originally taken up for trial in or around the month of June

of 2000 and the judgment was pronounced on 11.01.2005. The learned High

Court Judge who heard the case found the Appellant and the 1st Accused

guilty of all the charges.

Being aggrieved by the judgment dated 11.01.2005, the Appellant and the

1st Accused had lodged an appeal against the judgment in the Court of

Appeal under case No. CA 34-35/2000. Having considered the arguments

CA/HCC/0059/2013

4 | P a g e

raised by the parties their Lordships of the Court of Appeal remitted the case

back to the High Court for a re-trial on 03.09.2008.

The re-trial commenced before the High Court Judge of Panadura as the

Appellant had opted for a non-jury trial. After the conclusion of the

prosecution case, the learned High Court Judge had called for the defence

and the Appellant had given evidence from the witness box and had been

subjected to a lengthy cross examination by the prosecution. Additionally,

the Appellant had called witnesses on his behalf.

As the 1st Accused had passed away after giving evidence from the witness

box, the indictment was amended accordingly on 03.09.2012. The amended

indictment was read over to the Appellant and the Appellant had pleaded not

guilty.

After considering the evidence presented by both parties, the learned High

Court Judge had convicted the Appellant as charged and sentenced him as

follows:

• For the first count he was sentenced to death.

• For the second count he was sentenced to death.

• For the third count he was sentenced to 10 years rigorous

imprisonment with a fine of Rs.10,000/- and with a default sentence

of 06 months rigorous imprisonment.

• For the fourth count he was sentenced to 10 years rigorous

imprisonment with a fine of Rs.10,000/- with a default sentence of 06

months rigorous imprisonment.

• Rupees one million (Rs. 1,000,000.00) was ordered as compensation

payable to PW1 with a default sentence of 03 years simple

imprisonment.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

CA/HCC/0059/2013

5 | P a g e

The Learned President’s Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that

the Appellant has given consent to argue this matter in his absence. Also, at

the time of argument the Appellant was connected via the Zoom platform

from prison.

Background of the Case.

The prosecution case rests mainly on the testimony of an eye witness and

circumstantial evidence.

PW1 Siriyawathie, is the wife and mother of the two deceased respectively in

this case. The incident had taken place in the early hours on 17.08.1994.

Being an election day, she, with her deceased husband and deceased

daughter were very much awake when the incident had happened. Her son

and younger daughter were not at home as they had gone to watch TV. In

the early hours when all of them were listening to the election results, having

heard a strange noise followed by a petrol smell, when all had gone out to

check, they had seen the Appellant and the 1st Accused going to the house

of the 1st Accused, which was situated about 50 feet away from her house.

She had identified the Appellant and the 1st Accused with the light emanating

from Lalith Chandra’s house. His house was illuminated with an oil lamp. A

few minutes later, the Appellant had come with a sword and dealt a blow on

the neck of her husband. She had seen the assault with the aid of a street

light which was on at that time. After that, the Appellant had dealt a blow on

her, which had struck her right hand and her deceased daughter. At that

time, the 1st Accused had splashed petrol and set fire to her house. As the

petrol soaked her dress and her daughter’s dress they too were engulfed with

fire. She had then removed her dress in order to extinguish the fire. At that

time, she was clad in her underskirt only. When she looked for her daughter,

she had seen her daughter rolling on the floor in order to extinguish the fire

which had engulfed her. At that time her deceased daughter was fully naked.

CA/HCC/0059/2013

6 | P a g e

Afterwards, they ran up to the road, and had borrowed a blouse and a skirt

for her daughter. Her daughter was severely burnt at that time.

When they were running on the road, a police jeep had arrived and had taken

them to the Bandaragama Hospital. She had then told the entire incident to

the police officers who had taken them to the hospital. She had been

transferred to the Panadura Hospital thereafter and had received treatment

for nine days. She had arrived at her husband’s funeral from the hospital.

Her daughter had been transferred to the Colombo General Hospital.

A land dispute was in existence between the 1st Accused and the deceased’s

family. At the time of the incident, six cases were pending in the Magistrate

Court of Horana. Due to this, her house was smashed by the 1st Accused on

a previous occasion. As such, her house was in a dilapidated condition at

the time of the incident. Her daughter had also passed away, while receiving

treatment at the hospital.

According to PW9, IP Sirisena, on the day of the incident, being an election

day, he was on night patrol duty along with other police officers. Close to the

Rambukkana junction, two women with bleeding injuries had stopped their

vehicle and pleaded for help from them. PW1 had told him that the 1st

Accused and the Appellant had cut her husband and set fire to her house.

She and her daughter too had sustained severe injuries. As such, he had

taken both victims to the Bandaragama Hospital. As PW1 told him that her

husband too had sustained injuries, he and his team had gone to the place

of the incident and had found the deceased with bleeding injuries. He too

had been taken to the Bandaragama Hospital, but was pronounced dead on

admission.

Dr. Peiris, who had conducted the postmortem examination of the deceased

Pemanis, had noted serious injuries to the neck region. According to the

doctor, the death had been caused due to the damage caused to major blood

vessels in the neck region of the deceased.

CA/HCC/0059/2013

7 | P a g e

As PW7, who had held the post mortem of Samanthi Perera had gone abroad

when the re-trial commenced, Dr. Paranidaran was called to give evidence

on behalf of PW7. The doctor had noted burn injuries all over the body and

a cut on the deceased’s index finger. The deceased had sustained 90%

burning on her body. According to the doctor, the death was caused due to

extensive burning which led to septicemia.

PW 13, Dr. Hema Indrani, who had examined PW1, noted that Lalith

Chandra had caused injury to her. As the injury sustained on PW1 was a

serious one, she had taken steps to transfer PW1 to the Panadura Base

Hospital. Although she gave evidence with regard to the injury, she had not

submitted any report to support her evidence. The witness further said that

she had also treated the deceased Samanthi before she too was transferred

to the Panadura Base Hospital.

PW10, IP/Gajasinghe was the Officer-in-Charge of the Bandaragama Police

Station at the time of the incident. At about 2.45 am on the date of the

incident, he had received a message about the incident. He had gone to the

place of the incident and had inspected the place. When he went to the place,

he had seen the house of PW1 completely destroyed by fire. The street light

was on and the light condition was good to inspect the place. In front of the

house, he had noticed a pool of blood. Further, some dresses, including a

brassiere, were lying fallen near the pool of blood. He had come to know

about the involvement of the Appellant and the 1st Accused from PW9, IP

Sirisena. Upon an information received, the 1st Accused was arrested at 3.45

am at the house of a politician. The Appellant was arrested when he

surrendered to the police after a few days.

After the closure of the prosecution case, the defence had called both the 1st

Accused and the Appellant, who had given evidence from the witness box.

After giving evidence and before he could call his witnesses, the 1st Accused

had passed way. Hence, the indictment was amended accordingly.

CA/HCC/0059/2013

8 | P a g e

According to the Appellant, he knew that the 1st Accused had filed a case to

evict the deceased Pemanis from the land said to have been owned by the 1st

Accused. As the day in question was an election day, he had helped a local

politician and had gone to one Jagath Chandra’s house and stayed there

until the following day. He denied any involvement in this case. He admitted

that he was a good friend of the 1st Appellant.

The Appellant had filed the following grounds of appeal.

1. Whether the evidence of PW1 Siriyawathie can be relied upon to

convict the Appellant.

2. The learned High Court Judge had erred in applying the

Ellenborough and Lucas Principles.

3. Whether the alibi taken by the Appellant has not been correctly

considered by the Learned Trial Judge.

The Learned President’s Counsel for the Appellant had contended under the

1st ground of appeal, that the infirmities in the evidence of the main eye

witness PW1 have not been given due consideration.

The Learned President’s Counsel strenuously argued that the Learned Trial

Judge had failed to consider all the circumstances regarding whether PW1,

Siriyawathie had witnessed the incident as claimed by her in her testimony.

Identification is not an issue in this case as PW1 had known both the 1st

Accused and the Appellant very well before the incident. The issue is whether

there was sufficient light to identify the Appellant at the time of the incident.

PW1 had said in her evidence that they used a bottle lamp to get light at that

time. Further the street light was on at the time of the incident. With aid of

both, she could clearly identify the Appellant and the 1st Accused as the

perpetrators. When she ran for help in the dark half naked with her daughter

who was burnt severely, she had met PW9 IP/Sirisena and informed him

CA/HCC/0059/2013

9 | P a g e

about the incident with the names of the perpetrators. (Page 549 of the

proceedings).

PW10, who was the Officer-in-Charge of the Bandaragama Police Station,

had visited the place of the incident immediately after he received the

information from PW9 and observed that the street light was on at that time.

As stated above, PW1 Siriyawathie who is an eye witness had vividly

explained how this gruesome incident had happened. She had clearly seen

the attack on both the deceased before she could call for help.

In Wijepala v AG [2001] 1 SLR 46 the Court held that:

“ …Evidence of a single witness, if cogent and impressive, can be acted

upon by a Court, but, whenever there are circumstances of suspicion in

the testimony of such a witness…. then corroboration may be

necessary”.

The Learned High Court Judge in her judgment had considered the evidence

given by PW1 extensively and properly analyzed her evidence in its correct

perspective. She has reasonably considered all direct and circumstantial

evidence to arrive at her decision.

Further, the eye witness PW1 had given evidence in the High Court nearly

15 years after the incident. I consider her evidence to be clear and cogent

and it had not shaken her credibility or testimonial trustworthiness.

The defence had called a police officer who had recorded the statement of the

deceased Samanthi Perera as the dying declaration. In her statement, the

deceased had said that she could not identify the assailants at that time. The

police officer in his evidence said that the deceased was in a serious condition

and he is unable to say whether the deceased had properly comprehended

the questions posed to her at that time. The learned High Court Judge, in

her judgment had correctly analyzed the purported dying declaration of the

CA/HCC/0059/2013

10 | P a g e

deceased Samanthi and given plausible reasons as to why she disregarded

the same. (Pages 898-902 of the brief)

Next, the Learned President’s Counsel contended that the Learned High

Court Judge did not give due consideration regarding the omission

highlighted by the Appellant.

Owing to many different reasons, contradictions and omissions between the

testimonies presented by different witnesses of the same case are more or

less common in criminal trials. It is the duty of the Court as well as the

professional legal representatives to accurately distinguish between minor

and major discrepancies, the latter of which would only stand to affect the

case.

Further, in a criminal trial it is not always possible for a trial judge to observe

all the witnesses who had testified before the Court. This is due to various

factors including the transfers and retirement of judicial officers.

In State of Uttar Pradesh v. M. K. Anthony [AIR 1985 SC 48] the court

held that:

“While appreciating the evidence of a witness, the approach must be

whether the evidence of the witness read as a whole appears to have a

ring of truth. Once that impression is formed, it is undoubtedly

necessary for the court to scrutinise the evidence more particularly

keeping in view the deficiencies, draw-backs and infirmities pointed out

in the evidence as a whole and evaluate them to find out whether it is

against the general tenor of the evidence given by the witness and

whether the earlier evaluation of the evidence is shaken as to render it

unworthy of belief. Minor discrepancies on trivial matters not touching

the core of the case, hyper-technical approach by taking sentences torn

out of context here or there from the evidence, attaching importance to

some technical error committed by the investigating officer not going to

the: root of the matter would not ordinarily permit rejection of the

CA/HCC/0059/2013

11 | P a g e

evidence as a whole..…Even honest and truthful witnesses may differ

in some details unrelated to the main incident because power of

observation, retention and reproduction differ with individuals. Cross

examination is an unequal duel between a rustic and refined lawyer.”

In The Attorney General v Sandanam Pitchai Mary Theresa [2011] 2 SLR

292 the court held that:

“Whilst internal contradictions or discrepancies would ordinarily affect

the trustworthiness of the witness statement, it is well established that

the Court must exercise its judgment on the nature of the inconsistency

or contradiction and whether they are true material to the facts in issue”.

In this case, the highlighted omissions and contradictions were brought to

the attention of the learned High Court Judge who wrote the judgment, and

she had given due consideration to them in her judgment and given plausible

reasons as to why she disregarded the same.

Considering the circumstances under which the eye witness had witnessed

the incident and the time period in which she had given evidence after the

incident before the High Court, I consider that the omission highlighted has

no significance to this case as it is not forceful enough to affect the root of

the case.

As the Learned High Court Judge had considered all this evidence in her

judgment, it is incorrect to say that the Learned High Court Judge had failed

to give due consideration to the evidence of PW1 and the prosecution had

failed their duty to prove their case beyond a reasonable doubt. Hence, I

conclude that this ground has no merit.

CA/HCC/0059/2013

12 | P a g e

In the second ground of appeal, the learned President’s Counsel contends

that the learned High Court Judge erred in applying the Ellenborough and

Lucas Principles.

In this case, although the learned High Court Judge had considered the

Ellenborough and Lucas Principles, it had not caused any prejudice to the

Appellant, as the evidence given by PW1 was cogent and had not affected the

core of the case at any time during the trial. Therefore, I consider that this

ground has no merit.

In the final ground of appeal put forth by the Appellant, the Learned

President’s Counsel contended that the alibi taken by the accused has not

been adequately considered by the Learned Trial Judge.

It is trite law that no burden is cast upon the accused to prove his alibi, as

an alibi is not a defense. It is the duty of the Learned High Court Judge to

consider the alibi and if doubt arises in the mind of the Learned Trial Judge,

the benefit of the doubt must be awarded to the accused.

The Learned High Court Judge in his judgment at pages 935 to 946 of the

brief had considered the evidence given by the Appellant and his witnesses

and given reasons as to why she rejects the defense evidence. Hence, this

ground also has no merit.

Further, the Appellants had given evidence under oath and had been

subjected to cross-examination by the State Counsel. He had called his

witnesses to substantiate his claim.

The single most important criterion in evaluating the fairness of a trial is the

observance of the principle of equality of arms between the defence and the

prosecution. Equality of arms, which must be observed throughout the trial,

means that both parties are treated in a manner which ensures their

procedurally equal position during the course of the trial.

In this case the learned High Court Judge had considered the evidence

presented by both parties to arrive at her decision. She has properly analyzed

the evidence given by both sides in her judgment. As the evidence adduced

by the Appellant failed to create a doubt over the prosecution case, the

CA/HCC/0059/2013

13 | P a g e

conclusion reached by the learned High Court Judge in this case cannot be

faulted.

As discussed under the grounds of appeal advanced by the Appellants, the

prosecution had adduced strong and incriminating evidence against the

Appellant. The Learned High Court Judge had very correctly analyzed all the

evidence presented by all the parties and arrived at a correct finding that the

Appellant was guilty of charges depicted in the indictment.

Therefore, I affirm the conviction and dismiss the Appeal of the Appellant.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgement to the High

Court of Panadura along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL