l

l I I

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under and in terms of Section 331 of the Criminal Procedure Code Act No. 15 of 1979.

The Attorney General of the Democratic

Socialist RepubliC of Sri Lanka.

Complainant

Disanayake Mudiyanselage Premadasa.

Court of Appeal Accused Case No. CA 164/2013 Vs,

And Now Between

Disanayake Mudiyanselage Premadasa.

Accused-Appellant

High Court of Moneragala Case No. HC 169/ 2008 Vs,

Before

Counsel

The Attorney General of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

: S. Thurairaja PC, J &

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J

Complainant-Respondent

: Tirantha Walaliyadda PC, with Roshanara Abeywardana Attorney-

at-Law for the Appellant.

A.R.H. Bary SSC for the Respondent.

Written Submissions : Accused Appellant - 23 rd January 2018.

Complainant Respondent- 22nd October 2018.

Argument on

Judgment on

: 18th October 2018.

: 30th November 2018.

******************

JUDGMENT

s. Thurairaja, PC. J

The Accused -Appellant, Disanayake Mudiyanselage Premadasa (hereinafter

sometimes referred to as the Appellant) was indicted in the High Court of

Moneragala, under Section 357 and 364(2)(e) of the Penal Code. After the trial, the

Accused-Appellant found guilty for both offences and sentenced to 7 years Rigorous

Imprisonment and 15 years Rigorous Imprisonment for the respective offences. The

Learned Trial Judge further orders both sentences to be run concurrently.

Being aggrieved with the said conviction and sentence the Appellant had appealed

to the Court of Appeal and submitted only one ground of appeal. ie the identification

of the Appellant is not proved.

The prosecution led the evidence of Halgahapolage Indika Pushpa Kumari (victim),

Halgahapolage Piyadasa (PW 2- Father of the victim), Halgahapolage Shayamali

Saman Kumari (PW3-Sister of the victim), Doctor Ganesha Pillai Annaraj (Judicial

Medical Officer), Inspector of Police Herath Mudiyanselage Abeysinghe (PW4) and

Police Sergeant Algewiyanlage Sunil Shantha (PW8).

According to the prosecution witnesses on the 16th of May 1998, the prosecutrix who

was 13 years 7 months and 10 days old had gone to have bath with her sisters to the

nearby stream. At that time there was somebody had pelted stones at them. Then,

the sister of the prosecutrix had inquired, who is it. The victim then set out to their

home to complain about this incident to her father. She wore a t-shirt on top of her

wet bathing clothes and walked towards their home. On the way, the Appellant and

another encountered her and inquired about her going. There, she was informed

that, they have nothing to do with her but they want to take revenge on her sister.

After a brief quarrel, the Appellant stuffed clothes on her mouth and carried her

away. There she felt unconscious. When she re-gained conscious after a while, she

was found lying naked with both hands and legs were tied. Further she had a severe

pain on her lower abdomen. She also observed of bleeding through her vagina. Since

it was dusk, her father came in search of her and found her. Thereafter she was

untied, dressed up and taken home. On the following day, she was taken to the

Police and the Hospital. She identified the assailant as a son of "Kelin Mudalali". She

was taken to the house of the Appellant, there she saw the brother of the assailant

and said he is not the person. Thereafter, when she went to the Hospital, she was

given a lift by the Police officers, when they were travelling near the Police Station,

she had pointed at the Appellant and identified that he was the person, who

committed this offence on her.

The main and only ground of appeal is that, the identity of the Appellant was not

established.

Considering the facts of the case, it was revealed that, Kelin Mudalali had six children.

Three of them are small children aged 13, 10 and 8. Police excluded them and

searched for other three children. When they went to the house, she saw the 18 year

old child and said that he is not the person. Then the Police were left with two elder

sons. Both were taken to the Police Station by another team of Police Officers, when

they were in the compound, the victim who came there, pointed at the Appellant

(who was the eldest son of Kelin Mudalali), and said that, he was the one who

committed this offence on her.

It was revealed that, all of them are from the same village. The victim knew the

Appellant and others but not by name. The Learned Trial Judge was also mindful

that, the victim was a child of 13 years of age.

The Learned Trial Judge had adequately considered the evidence against the

Appellant and came to his conclusions. Further we observed that, the Learned High

Court Judge taken extra care of the proof of the identity of the Appellant. We are

convinced that, the findings of the Learned Trial Judge are well founded. Under these

circumstances, we do not find any reasons to interfere with the findings of the

Learned Trial Judge.

Regarding the sentence the Learned Trial Judge has given opportunity to both

Counsels to make submissions. After considering the aggravating and mitigating

circumstances, had imposed 7 years Rigorous Imprisonment and a fine of Rs.

25,000/- in default 2 years Rigorous Imprisonment for the 1 st count.

For the 2nd count 15 years Rigorous Imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 25,000/-, In

default 4 years Rigorous Imprisonment. In addition, that he was ask to pay

Rs. 200,000/- to the victim child, in default 2 years Rigorous Imprisonment.

Further the Trial Judge ordered the substantive sentence for the 1 st and 2nd count to

be implemented concurrently.

After carefully considering the conviction and the sentence we find that, we have no

reason to interfere with the same. Hence, we dismiss the appeal and affirm the

conviction and the sentence. Sentences to be implemented from today.

Appeal Dismissed.

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL