==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/261/19

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979, read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: Rankothpedige Sujeewa Rohana CA/HCC/0261/2019 Kularatne High Court of Chilaw Case No. HC/47/2017 ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Radha Kuruvitabandara for the Appellant.

Wasantha Perera, DSG for the Respondent.

CA/HCC/261/19

2

ARGUED ON : 20/05/2026 DECIDED ON : 08/07/2026

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted by the Attorney General for committing the offence

as mentioned below:

On or about the 07th October 2009 in Mungandaluwa the accused committed

the murder of Kirimudiyanselage Malani which is an offence punishable

under Section 296 of the Penal Code.

In the course of the same transaction the accused did hurt to one

Muthunayake Pedilage Sanjeewani using a knife and during such

transaction, with the knowledge or intention of the Accused may have caused

the death of said Muthunayake Pedilage Sanjeewani, thereby committing the

attempted murder of Muthunayake Pedilage Sanjeewani which is an offence

punishable under Section 300 of the Penal Code.

The trial commenced before the High Court Judge of Chilaw as the Appellant

opted for a non-jury trial. The prosecution had led nine witnesses and

marked production P1-P3 and closed the case. The Learned High Court

CA/HCC/261/19

3

Judge having been satisfied that the evidence presented by the prosecution

warranted a case to answer, called for the defence and explained the rights

of the accused. The Appellant opted to remain silent in this case.

After considering the evidence presented by both parties, the Learned High

Court Judge had convicted the Appellant as charged and sentenced him to

death on 02/05/2019 for the 1st count. The Appellant was not sentenced on

the second count.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and the sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given his consent to argue this matter in his absence. At the hearing the

Appellant was connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant has raised the following grounds

of appeal on behalf of the Appellant:

1. That Learned Trial Judge has failed to consider the reliability of the

03 main prosecution witnesses.

2. The prosecution has failed to establish the murderous intention of the

Appellant.

3. That the Learned Trial Judge has erred in law in deciding that the

prosecution has proved the case beyond reasonable ground and the

conviction and sentence are not safe to stand.

The background of the case albeit briefly is as follows:

This case mainly rests on the testimonies of three main witnesses, namely

PW2, PW4 and PW5 and on circumstantial evidence.

According to PW2, Nobert, he is the husband of the deceased and father of

the victim, PW1. Further, the Appellant was the son-in-law of PW2 and the

deceased and the husband of PW1 Sanjeewani. According to PW2, his

daughter got married to the Appellant on her own accord. His daughter’s

CA/HCC/261/19

4

marriage life was not peaceful, and as such the couple was separated. Five

days before the incident, they had moved to a new rented house, where the

incident had taken place. On the day of the incident, at about 5.00am, when

his deceased wife had gone out to go the kitchen, the Appellant waylaid and

attacked the deceased with a Manna knife. The Appellant held the deceased

by her hair and cut her to death using a Manna knife. PW2 had identified

the Appellant at that time very correctly.

During the Cross examination, PW2 had stated that due to internal quarrels

that happened between them, including his daughter, they had moved to a

rented house. He admitted that he and his wife did not like the daughter’s

marriage. At the time of the incident, the Appellant had also attacked her

daughter with the same knife. She had run to the house of PW4, Levis

Fernando and saved her life. As his daughter sustained injuries on her head

and her hands, he had taken steps to send her to the Chilaw Hospital.

According to PW2, after the attack, the Appellant had gone to the direction

of Karavitagara on a bicycle.

PW4, Levis Fernando who was a neighbour of the deceased told court that

when he was getting ready to go for work, at about 5.00am on the day of the

incident PW2 had informed him about the incident at which time, he had

gone to the deceased’s house. At that time, he had seen the Appellant leaving

the place on a bicycle with a manna knife in his possession. As PW1 had

sustained injuries, he too had helped her to go to the hospital. PW4 had

further said that he had seen the deceased was lying face downward at that

time.

PW1 is the legal wife of the Appellant. As their marriage was not entered into

with her parents’ blessings, there had been internal quarrels between them.

As such, the couple was separated and PW1 was living with her parents with

her children. On the day of the incident, when she was with her parents in

a rented house, on 07.10.2009 hearing cries when she alighted from the bed,

she was cut by the Appellant, upon which she had landed on her face and

CA/HCC/261/19

5

her hands. She was then rushed to the Chilaw Hospital and transferred to

Colombo General Hospital immediately. After receiving treatment for about

9 days, she was transferred to the Chilaw Hospital for further treatment. Due

to the restriction under Section 120 of the Evidence Ordinance, she has not

given evidence regarding the death of her mother.

According to PW7, the investigation officer, he had gone to the place of

incident on 07.10.2009 at 8.00am. He had inspected the body of the

deceased which was lying fallen in the second room. The house was provided

with electricity and there was no difficulty in identifying persons.

Investigation revealed that the deceased’s party had moved to the house just

five days before the incident.

According to the JMO who held the post mortem examination of the

deceased, 14 cut injuries were noted and the cause of death is due to deep

extensive necessarily fatal cut injuries of the head due to blows inflicted by

a sharp cutting long bladed weapon with unlimited striking surface

compared to the injuries.

The Appellant had remained silent when being called for the defence. He had

not called any witnesses on his behalf.

In the argument, the Counsel strenuously stressed that the Learned High

Judge had failed to consider the reliability of PW2, PW4 and PW5. According

to her, PW2 is an interested witness with longstanding hostility towards the

Appellant. This is due to the fact that the Appellant, who had married PW2’s

daughter, had illtreated his daughter thereby he had given evidence which

was biased towards the prosecution.

This argument has no merit as PW2 had clearly witnessed the fatal attack

on his wife, the deceased. Further, it is evident that PW1 had lived separately

away from the Appellant given his abusive nature. PW1 had given details on

the Appellant’s frequent violent nature after intoxication prior to this attack,

which caused her to make the decision to live separately.

CA/HCC/261/19

6

The Learned High Court Judge had very correctly analysed his evidence and

given reasons as to why he accepts PW2’s as cogent evidence.

Next, the Learned Counsel for the Appellant contended that PW4 is also an

unreliable witness. It was contended that although he had told the police

that he had seen the Appellant going on a bicycle with a sword in his

possession, during the trial he had said that the Appellant had ran away

from the rear door of the deceased’s house with a knife. This witness had

given evidence about 10 years after the incident and he was 66 years.

Minor contradictions, inconsistencies or changes regarding trivial matters,

which would not affect the core of the prosecution’s case must not be a

reason for such evidence to be rejected in its entirety. The Court would be

responsible in formulating an opinion on the credibility of the witness, and

as such, arrive at a finding on whether the deposition of the witness is

reliable and trustworthy. Minor variations of statements by a witness cannot

be categorised strictly as improvements as such variations may in fact be

elaborations of the previous statements made by the same witness.

In such situations, where the evidence of a witness is to be appreciated, it

must be considered if the evidence of the witness read as a whole would have

a ring of truth. Once this has been established, it would be necessary for the

Court to assess the evidence while considering whether the discrepancies

and infirmities pointed out would go against the substance of the evidence,

and if so, whether the earlier evaluation of the evidence is now shaken and

would therefore make such evidence unworthy of belief.

In State of Uttar Pradesh v. M. K. Anthony [AIR 1985 SC 48] the court

held that:

“While appreciating the evidence of a witness, the approach must be

whether the evidence of the witness read as a whole appears to have a

ring of truth. Once that impression is formed, it is undoubtedly

necessary for the court to scrutinise the evidence more particularly

CA/HCC/261/19

7

keeping in view the deficiencies, draw-backs and infirmities pointed out

in the evidence as a whole and evaluate them to find out whether it is

against the general tenor of the evidence given by the witness and

whether the earlier evaluation of the evidence is shaken as to render it

unworthy of belief. Minor discrepancies on trivial matters not touching

the core of the case, hyper-technical approach by taking sentences torn

out of context here or there from the evidence, attaching importance to

some technical error committed by the investigating officer not going to

the : root of the matter would not ordinarily permit rejection of the

evidence as a whole..…Even honest and truthful witnesses may differ

in some details unrelated to the main incident because power of

observation, retention and reproduction differ with individuals. Cross

examination is an unequal duel between a rustic and refined lawyer.”

In the case of The State Of Tamil Nadu vs Ponnusamy (2026 INSC 507)

it was held:

“No doubt, there are certain contradictions and omissions in their

testimonies, however, mere presence of contradictions and omissions

does not demolish the credibility of public witnesses, as long as they

appear to be natural and are duly explained. The High Court appears to

have proceeded on a presumption of falsehood and the findings in the

impugned judgment are not based on concrete doubts; rather, the

findings are based on suppositions and the Court’s own subjective

assessment of how a public witness is supposed to depose before the

Court.

When we say that every contradiction is not fatal, we essentially mean

that every contradiction carries different weight and the weight is to be

adjudged in light of the surrounding evidence and the peculiar facts

associated with a witness, including the fact that a public witness is

CA/HCC/261/19

8

almost invariably out of his comfort zone while deposing before a Court

of law, that too in a murder trial.”

In The Attorney General v. Sandanam Pitchai Mary Theresa [2011] 2

SLR 292 the court held that:

“Whilst internal contradictions or discrepancies would ordinarily affect

the trustworthiness of the witness statement, it is well established that

the Court must exercise its judgment on the nature of the inconsistency

or contradiction and whether they are material to the facts in issue”.

Further, the evidence given by PW5 corroborates the evidence given by PW2

and PW4 regarding the location of where the body of the deceased had fallen

onto, and the assistance given by PW4 to take PW1 to the hospital after the

attack. Further, PW5’s evidence identifies that the voice she had heard

during this attack was the Accused’s (her father’s) voice. This too has been

correctly dealt with by the Learned High Court Judge.

Therefore, the Learned High Court Judge had very correctly dealt the

evidence given by the aforementioned three important witnesses. In her

judgment she had considered the contradictions and omissions and given

plausible reasons as to why she accepts their evidence as cogent.

Learned Counsel for the Appellant finally contended that the prosecution has

failed to prove the murderous intention of the Appellant beyond a reasonable

doubt.

Vithana and Others v. Republic of Sri Lanka [2007] 1 SLR 169 has been

noted to substantiate his argument. In that case Sisira de Abrew, J. held

that:

“(1) The intention that is contemplated in the 1st limb of Section 294 is

the intention to cause death which is commonly known as murderous

intention,”

CA/HCC/261/19

9

The existence of a murderous intention generally has to be inferred from the

circumstances.

In Bastian Silva v Appuhamy 4 NLR 47 the Court held that:

“It is not the nature of the wound, but the intention of the accused, which

is decisive as to the nature of the crime committed.”

In the case of R. G. Somapala v The Queen (1969) 72 NLR 121 it was held

that:

“There was misdirection in that there was a lack of appreciation of

important points of difference between a. 293 and s. 294 of the Penal Code.

While the act of causing death with knowledge that the act is likely to

cause death is culpable homicide, such an act is not murder, unless either

(a) the offender intends to cause bodily injury and has the special

knowledge that the intended injury is likely to cause the death of the

person injured, or (b) the offender knows that, because the act is so

imminently dangerous, there is the high probability of causing death or an

injury likely to cause death.”

In the case of Farook v Attorney General (2006) 3 SLR 174 it was held

that:

“As regards the attempt to bring the case to one of culpable homicide not

amounting to murder mainly on the basis that there is no intention to

cause death, the intention that is required is to cause the injury in fact

inflicted. If the intended injury is sufficient to cause death in the

ordinary course of nature, the offence is murder;

The injury which caused the death was the one inflicted by the accused.

The sufficiency of the injury was objectively established. The sufficiency

is the high probability of death in the ordinary way of nature and when

this exists and death ensues, and if the causing of the injury is intended,

the offence is murder;

CA/HCC/261/19

10

The determinant factor is the intentional injury which must be sufficient

to cause death in the ordinary course of nature, that is to say, if the

probability of death is not so high, the offence does not fall within

murder but within culpable homicide not amounting to murder or

something less”

In this case, the injuries sustained by the deceased play a decisive role in

the determination of this case as to whether the Appellant had actuated the

murderous intention or not. Hence, the circumstantial evidence pertaining

to the injuries found on the deceased’s body need to be discussed in detail.

According to the JMO there are other cut injuries of the head, neck, back of

chest, left hand and left shoulder and the latter is also necessarily fatal. The

injuries are concentrated on head and neck areas. When specifically asked

regarding which wounds were fatal and would have caused the death, the

JMO submitted that Injuries No. 3, 5, 6 and 7 are fatal injuries while Injury

No. 4 was likely to cause death in the ordinary course of nature. The

distribution and the severity of the injuries is in keeping with over killing

phenomenon.

It was noted that some wounds were consistent with an individual

attempting to protect oneself. Accordingly, it was seen on the body that the

deceased’s hands were made into a fist which the JMO opined was due to

the deceased’s attempt to protect herself.

As such, in this case, the JMO had detailed and given comprehensive

evidence about the injuries found on the deceased and its causation to death.

In respect of the injuries sustained by PW1, it has been noted that some of

the severe injuries required surgery and took almost a year to heal. PW1 has

evidently lost motor function in certain fingers as a result of these injuries.

As per the evidence, such injuries could have caused death, and are

consistent with that of what would be the result of injuries caused by a heavy

and sharp weapon.

CA/HCC/261/19

11

As discussed under the appeal ground advanced by the Appellant, the

prosecution had adduced strong and incriminating direct and circumstantial

evidence against the Appellant. The Learned High Court Judge had very

correctly analyzed all the evidence presented by both parties and had come

to a conclusion that the Appellant is guilty of murder.

Although, the Learned High Court Judge found the Appellant guilty of

Attempted murder of his wife PW1, the Learned High Court Judge had not

imposed any sentence against the Appellant. I too will not impose any

sentence on the second count.

As the Learned High Court Judge had rightly convicted the Appellant for the

charge levelled against him in the indictment, I affirm the conviction and

dismiss the Appeal of the Appellant.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Chilaw along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL