IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under

Section 11 of High Court of

Provinces: (Special Provisions)

Act No. 19 of 1990, Section 331,

333 of the Criminal Procedure

Code No. 15 of 1979.

Court of Appeal Case No:

HCC - 0019 - 0024 / 2017

High Court Badulla Case No: Democratic Socialist Republic of

Criminal / 01 / 2015 Sri Lanka.

Complainant

Vs.

1. Rajamantri Patabandige

Somaratne.

2. Dissanayake Mudiyanselage

Abeyratne.

3. Dharmapalitha

Padmakumara Gamage.

4. Samarakoon Mudiyanselage

Ruwan Pushpakumara.

5. Dissanayake Mudiyanselage

Wijeratne.

6. Samarakoon Mudiyanselage

Jayasundera.

Accused

Page 2 of 11

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Rajamantri Patabandige

Somaratne.

2. Dissanayake Mudiyanselage

Abeyratne.

3. Dharmapalitha

Padmakumara Gamage.

4. Samarakoon Mudiyanselage

Ruwan Pushpakumara.

5. Dissanayake Mudiyanselage

Wijeratne.

6. Samarakoon Mudiyanselage

Jayasundera.

Accused Appellants

Vs.

The Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent.

Before : Menaka Wijesundera J.

B. Sasi Mahendran J.

Counsel : Anil Silva, P.C. with Shaluka Neranga for the 1st

Accused Appellant.

Neranjan Jayasinghe with D.D.K. Katugampola for

the 2nd and 4th Accused Appellants.

Saliya Peiris, P.C. with Thanuka Nandasiri for the

Page 3 of 11

3rd Accused Appellant.

Nalin Ladduwahetty, P.C. with Kavithri Ubeysekera,

Rajitha Samarasekera and Menuka Premashantha

for the 5th Accused Appellant.

For the 6th Accused - Appellant - Nandasiri Yapa on

07.09.2017, Rohitha Rajapaksha on 09.10.207,

Pradeep Fernando on 16.07.2018, Bhagya Herath

on 03.12.2018.

Madhawa Tennakoon, D.S.G. for the State.

Argued on : 10.07.2023

Decided on : 08.08.2023

MENAKA WIJESUNDERA J.

The instant appeals have been lodged to set aside the judgment dated

09.01.2017 of the High Court of Badulla.

The accused appellants had been indicted on the basis of unlawful assembly

to commit murder and hurt and in the alternative on the basis of common

intention to commit murder and hurt.

The prosecutions narrative states that on 07.05.2014 around 6.30 in the

evening, the deceased, along with his brother and three other relatives, had

gone to a location to inspect a three-wheeler for a potential purchase. While

waiting for the owner to arrive with the vehicle, a group of police officers, led

by the first accused appellant, had arrived at the scene. The prosecution

alleges that the group of police officers proceeded to assault the deceased

and his companions, accusing them of engaging in treasure hunting.

Thereafter, they had been taken in the police jeep and had been provided

with dinner by the first accused appellant.

Page 4 of 11

Thereafter, they had been brought to the Kandaketiya police station and had

been in the cell and on the next day the parents had visited them and then

the group had complained that they had been assaulted.

On the same day they had been taken to the hospital and then to the

Magistrate and had been remanded for treasure hunting and to the prison

officers the group had complained that they had been assaulted by the police,

however, neither the magistrate nor the doctor had been informed of the

assault.

Thereafter, the deceased had developed a difficulty in breathing and he had

been entered to the remand hospital and he had died on the 9th of May. The

brother of the deceased, who is the first witness for the prosecution, had

stated that while they were in the same cell, his deceased brother informed

him that the first accused appellant had assaulted him inside the jungle

asking him whether he had been treasure hunting.

The Judicial Medical Officer (hereinafter referred to as the JMO) who

conducted the post mortem had stated in evidence that the deceased has

had 9 injuries and the first had been the fatal injury on the head which had

caused extensive damage to the brain.

The version of the first accused appellant is that he had been the officer in

charge (hereinafter referred to as the OIC) of the crime branch of the

Kandaketiya police and on 07.05.2014 the OIC of the station had received a

telephone call at about 8.45 p.m. saying that in the area of kandaketiya police

station that some people were trying to excavate an archeological site.

Hence, he had been asked to commence investigations and as such he had

detailed the accused appellants from the 2nd to the 6th and the officer called

Gratian to go to the place. As they had approached the place it had been

pitch dark but he had seen the group arrested being in a fight with each other

and they had been carrying heavy torch lights. As such the first accused

appellant had to slap them to bring the group under control and upon doing

Page 5 of 11

so, they had put them to the jeep and had been taken to a boutique and had

been bought food by the first accused appellant. Thereafter, he had not dealt

with them.

The OIC of the Kandeketiya police station had been called to give evidence

and had corroborated the version of the 1st accused appellant and he had

reiterated the position of the first accused appellant about the receipt of the

information and the time of the out entry from the police station. The relevant

portions had been marked in evidence. The inspector who had investigated

the instant matter also had said in evidence in chief that the out entry of the

1st accused appellant had been at 9 p.m. and the receipt of the information

received by the OIC had been at 8.45 p.m. which portions had also been

marked in Court. (695 p).

According to the above stated evidence the time quoted by the witnesses of

the prosecution is different from the time quoted by the defense but the

position of the defense is corroborated by the notes put by the investigative

officers which had been marked by the prosecution.

The officer Gratian who had been called to give evidence had said that the

deceased was assaulted by the first accused appellant and not by the others.

The accused appellants from 2nd to the 6th had also said the same thing in

their statements from the dock. The first accused appellant in the evidence had said that he had to assault

the deceased in order to bring the situation under control because at the time

they reached the alleged place the witnesses of the prosecution had been

fighting among themselves. However, during the cross examination he had

admitted that he had not put notes with regard to the scuffle among the group

but he had said the same thing in the affidavit filed in Supreme Court in the

fundamental rights application filed by the prosecution witnesses, but the

other accused had differed from their position in the Supreme Court.

Page 6 of 11

However, this Court observes that according to the prosecution the incident

had taken place around 6.30 p.m. and 7 p.m. but as per the defense the first

information regarding the treasure hunting had been received at 8.45 p.m.

and the police party departed on the instructions of the OIC at 9 p.m. This is

substantiated by the evidence of the OIC and the notes put by the first

accused appellant which had been marked through the evidence of the chief

investigative officer of the prosecution. Hence the question arises as to the

testimonial trustworthiness of the evidence of the prosecution lay witnesses

who has said that the incident took place at 6.30 p.m.

Hence, both parties agree to the presence at the scene of crime and both

parties agree that the group in the prosecution had been assaulted, but the

question to be decided by this Court is as to what purpose the deceased and

the others had been assaulted by the accused appellants.

The main prosecution witness is the brother of the deceased who initially

claimed that all the accused assaulted them, but later contradicted himself

by stating that only the first accused assaulted them. The other witnesses

also did not implicate the remaining accused appellants, except for the first

accused appellant, there are contradictions inter say and per say in the case

for the prosecution.

Furthermore, the version of the defense is that the accused party had been

carrying out a lawful duty and they had tried to exert force on a group who

had been found in a godforsaken place at a very unforthcoming time and

fighting among themselves and carrying illumination which does seem to be

over whelming for their purpose of the visit to the place. Hence, the story of

the prosecution appears to be very improbable and of without much merit.

Furthermore, the prosecution had relied on a dying declaration made to the

brother of the deceased who had said in evidence that the brother had been

taken away from the scene by the 1st accused appellant and he said that he

was assaulted by him. However, the prosecution had not placed any

Page 7 of 11

evidence to indicate as to what the other accused had been doing during

those 45 minutes which casts a serious ambiguity as with regard to the fact

whether all the accused along with the 1st shared the common murderous

object to cause hurt to the deceased .

In terms of section 32 of the Evidence Ordinance, No. 14 of 1895 (as

amended) provides that any statements written or verbal of relevant facts

made by a person who cannot be called as witnesses becomes relevant

under certain circumstances.

Section 32 (1) of the Evidence Ordinance states as follows;

When the statement is made by a person as to the cause of his death

or as to any of the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in

his death, in cases in which the cause of that persons death comes

into question.

Professor G.L. Peiris in his work The Law of Evidence in Sri Lanka

has stated as follows;

A statement, to be treated as admissible under section 32 (1) should

satisfy the following criteria;

(a) The person making the statement should be dead at the time of the

legal proceeding in the course of which the statement is sought to

be admitted. It is not necessary, however, that the cause of death

should have arisen prior to the making of the statement.

(b) While the nature of the proceeding is not material, it is essential

that the cause of the declarants death should come into question

in the relevant proceedings.

(c) The statement should concern either the cause of death or any of

the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in death.

(d) Where the death of more than one person is caused during the

same transaction, a dying declaration by any of the victims

Page 8 of 11

constitutes admissible evidence also in respect of the

circumstances attendant on the death of the other or others.

(e) The competency of the deponent or declarant as a witness is a

condition precedent of admissibility of the statement.

In the case of Mendis vs. Paramaswami1 Basnayake, C.J. held that;

Now section 32 is the only section of the Evidence Ordinance which

permits the proof of relevant facts contained in statements made by

deceased persons. The type of evidence permitted by the section is

known as hearsay evidence. A statement of relevant facts cannot be

admitted under the section unless the statement consists of the very

words of the deceased person.

It is well established law that in a criminal matter the proving of a charge

levelled against an accused is the duty of the prosecution. If the time of

incident has been challenged by the accused it is the duty of the prosecution

to dispel any doubt which had arisen in their case and the prosecution must

prove their charges beyond a reasonable doubt.

When this Court evaluates the evidence of the prosecution, we find that the

time of the incident established by the prosecution had been seriously

challenged by the defense, if that is so the rest of the evidence placed before

this Court by the prosecution also cannot be relied upon especially in view of

the discrepancies in the evidence of the prosecution witnesses inter say and

per say.

The instant case has been based on the formation of an unlawful assembly

to assault the deceased; hence the prosecution has to establish beyond a

reasonable doubt that there were more than five persons participating and

that they all shared the common object mentioned above. In the case of

1 62 NLR 302.

Page 9 of 11

Jagathsena and others vs G.D.P.Perea and others2 following has been

held regrinding the principles of unlawful assembly,

The mere presence of a person in an unlawful assembly render

him a member. Unless it is shown that he said or done something

or omitted to do something which would make him a member of

such unlawful assembly. The prosecution must place evidence

pointing to each accused having done something from which the

inference could be drawn that each entertained the object which

is said to be the common object of such assemblyThe

common object can be collected from the nature of the assembly

, the arms used by them ,the behavior of the assembly,and

subsequent conduct.It is not sufficient for such evidence to be

sufficient for such evidence to be consistent with such inference

but must be the only conclusion possible.

As such in the instant case we find that the accused appellants had gone to

the place of incident to carry out a legally bound duty and in doing so we see

that the 1st accused appellant and others had assaulted the deceased and

had caused injuries. Hence, we do not find the formation of an unlawful

assembly although the numbers were right because the accused appellants

had not shared an illegal object among themselves. Thereafter according to

the much relied upon dying declaration the deceased had been taken away

by the 1st accused appellant from the scene for a duration of 45 minutes

which proves further that there was no common object shared among the

accused appellants with regard to the assault of the deceased and also a

clear conclusion cannot be drawn that it was the accused appellants and no

one else caused the fatal injury on the deceased.

2 (1992) 1 Sri L.R. 375.

Page 10 of 11

The evidence against the 2nd to the sixth accused appellants are none with

regard to the causing of injuries to the prosecution witnesses, and with regard

to the assault of the deceased also the prosecution witnesses had not

implicated the accused appellants from the 2nd to the 6th apart from witness

number 1 who had contradicted himself.

Hence in view of the facts sated above we are of the view that there was

no unlawful assembly formed during the incident and we see that the

2nd to the 6th accused appellants should be acquitted from all charges

found guilty by the trial judge. Hence the appeal of the 2nd to the 6th

accused appellants are hereby allowed.

The next question is with regard to the culpability of the 1st accused appellant.

From the evidence stated above we find that the 1st accused appellant had

caused injuries to the deceased when he had been assigned a duty by his

superior officer, then the question is whether he had exceeded the limit of

restraint which a police officer is required to exercise at a time of resistance

by a suspect when apprehending him or her.

We find that the deceased had suffered extensive damage to his brain and

has had injuries caused by a blunt force. In view of the evidence analyzed

above there is no evidence to draw the irresistible inference that the 1st

accused appellant caused the fatal blow but there is evidence that the 1st

accused appellant caused injuries to the deceased. At this juncture we

specifically draw our attention to the submissions of the special prosecutor

who had said in his submissions in the trial court that the charges against

the appellants were not levelled on the basis that the accused appellants

acted with the intention of causing murder of the deceased.

Hence, in view of the aforesaid reasons we conclude that it is only but fair to

say that the 1st accused appellant has not displayed any intention to commit

the murder of the deceased. Hence, we set aside the trial judges finding of

Page 11 of 11

murder against the 1st accused appellant but we see that the 1st accused

appellant when assaulting the deceased had acted with the knowledge of

causing his death for the reason that he had been a police officer of many

years of experience and he had been duty bound to act with restraint in a

situation of resistance.

As such we set aside the conviction and sentence entered by the trial judge

against the 1st accused appellant and find him guilty for culpable homicide

not amounting to murder on the basis of knowledge and impose a sentence

of 07 years rigorous imprisonment from the date of the conviction by the trial

judge.

As such the appeal of the 1st accused appellant dismissed subject to

the above variation.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Sasi Mahendran J,

I Agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL