IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CASE NO: CA/RI/20/2017

DC MATHUGAMA CASE NO: 4513/P

1. Kannangaraarachchige Kumudini

Sandya,

Arawa Road,

Palligoda South,

Mathugama.

2. Kekulandala Liyanage Don

Siripala,

No. 1/186,

Aluthgama Road,

Mathugama.

3. Amugoda Kankanamge

Kusumawathie,

No. 12/186,

Aluthgama Road,

Mathugama.

4. Sapuarachchige Rathnapala,

5. Sapuarachchige Piyasiri

Hemachandra,

Both of No. 27/186,

Aluthgama Road,

Palligoda South,

Mathugama.

Petitioners

2

Vs.

1A. Sujatha Nandaseeli Vithana,

Captain Jeewan Vithana

Mawatha,

Aluthgama Road,

Mathugama.

2. Dona Seemanralalage

Dhanawathi Gunawardena,

Gamini Mawatha,

Mathugama.

Plaintiff-Respondents

And Other Defendant-

Respondents

Before: A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Dr. Sunil Cooray for the Petitioners.

Rohana Deshapriya for the 2nd Plaintiff-

Respondent.

J.M. Wijebandara for the 6th, 11th and 12th

Defendant-Respondents.

Arjuna Perera for the 7th, 9th and 10th

Defendant-Respondents.

Argued on: 30.09.2019

Decided on: 24.10.2019

3

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The two plaintiffs have filed this action (No. 4513/P) by plaint

dated 26.06.2006 in the District Court of Matugama to partition

the land in extent of 2 Roods and 30 Perches depicted in Plan

No. 112821 of the Surveyor General among the plaintiffs and the

1st-7th defendants. At the uncontested trial, only the 2nd plaintiff

has given evidence and marked the deeds. After trial the learned

District Judge has delivered the Judgment dated 19.03.2014

partitioning the land among the two plaintiffs and the 1st-7th and

9th-12th defendants. The Interlocutory Decree has thereafter

been entered, and commission has been issued to prepare the

final scheme of partition. Thereafter the five petitioners to this

application who were not parties to the main case have made

applications to the District Court under section 839 of the Civil

Procedure Code seeking to set aside the Judgment and the

Interlocutory Decree on the basis that parts of their lands have

also been included into the Preliminary Plan, which they became

aware for the first time when the surveyor came to the land for

final survey. These applications have rightly been rejected by

the learned District Judge by order dated 10.11.2016, and

thereafter the leave to appeal application filed against that order

in the Provincial High Court of Civil Appeal of Kalutara has

correctly been withdrawn by the petitioners to file this

application for revision and restitutio in integrum. In the

meantime, the proposed Final Plan has been prepared and

several parties including the 2nd plaintiff who was the sole

witness at the trial have filed objections to the proposed scheme

of partition.

4

At the argument before this Court, the learned counsel for the

6th, 11th and 12th defendants took up four preliminary objections

to the maintainability of this application. As the learned counsel

was very keen on having a ruling on them prior to considering

the merits of the petitioners application, I will first deal with

them. They are as follows:

1. There is no averment in the body of the petition or in the

prayer to the petition seeking restitution.

2. The petitioners cannot be added as parties as prayed for

in view of section 69 of the Partition Law.

3. The petitioners are guilty for lashes.

4. As the petitioners are not parties to the main case, they

cannot seek restitution.

It is convenient to deal with the 1st and the 4th objections

together. Those two objections are based on the premise that

this is a pure restitutio in integrum application. I cannot possibly

understand, by reading the petition, on what basis the learned

counsel states so, when nowhere in the petition has it been

stated that this is a pure restitutio in integrum application. In

the legend of the petition, which is part of the caption, it is

stated that: In the matter of an application for Revision or

restitutio in integrum in terms of Article 138 and 145 of the

Constitution against the Judgment dated 23.04.2014 and

Interlocutory Decree dated 24.09.2014. In paragraphs 10 and

11 of the petition also the petitioners seek to set aside the

5

Decree by invoking the jurisdiction of this Court by way of

revision or restitutio in integrum.

It is settled law that an application for restitutio in integrum can

only be filed by a party to a case1, and a Partition Case is not an

exception.2

It was held in Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation Ltd v.

Shanmugam3 that:

The power of restitution differs from revisionary power of

this court in that the latter is exercised where the legality or

propriety of any order or proceedings of a lower court is

questioned. Restitution reinstates a party to his original

legal condition which he has been deprived of by the

operation of law. Thus it follows, the remedy can be availed

of only by one who is actually a party to the legal

proceeding in respect of which restitution is desired.

When the petitioners expressly state that this is an application

for revision or restitutio in integrum, how can this be dismissed

in limine on the basis that this is a pure restitutio in integrum

application?

The learned counsel was heard to say that the application made

to the Provincial High Court of Civil Appeal was withdrawn to file

a restitutio in integrum application before this Court, for

1 For example: Perera v. Wijewickreme (1912) 15 NLR 411, Menchinahamy v. Muniweera (1950) 52 NLR 409, Fathima v. Mohideen [1998] 3 Sri LR 294 at 300, Velun Singho v. Suppiah [2007] 1 Sri LR 370 2 Dissanayake v. Elisinahamy [1978/79] 2 Sri LR 118, Ranasinghe v. Gunasekera [2006] 2 Sri LR 393 3 [1995] 1 Sri LR 55 at 59

6

otherwise, the petitioners could have field a revision application

in the Provincial High Court of Civil Appeal. I cannot agree. The

application filed before the Provincial High Court of Civil Appeal

was a Leave to Appeal Application against the order of the

District Court refusing the application of the petitioners to

intervene after the Interlocutory Decree was entered. The

District Judges order is correct as he had no jurisdiction to do

it. It is significant to note that the petitioners in this application

do not seek to canvass that order. They seek to set aside the

Judgment and the Interlocutory Decree entered by the District

Court on different grounds, which I will advert to later.

As far as revisionary jurisdiction is concerned, both the Court of

Appeal and the Provincial High Court of Civil Appeal have

concurrent or parallel jurisdiction.4 The petitioners can come

either before this Court or before the Provincial High Court of

Civil Appeal by way of revision.

However, in terms of section 5D(1) of the High Court of the

Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No.19 of 1990, as amended by

High Court of the Provinces (Special Provinces) (Amendment) Act

No. 54 of 2006, once a revision application which could have

been filed before the Provincial High Court of Civil Appeal is filed

before this Court, the President of the Court of Appeal can

transfer such application to the appropriate Provincial High

Court of Civil Appeal for hearing and determination of the

matter. Section 5D(1) reads as follows:

4 Vide my Judgment in Munasinghe v. Ariyawansa, CA/RI/15/2018, decided on 02.11.2018.

7

Where any appeal or application in respect of which the

jurisdiction is granted to a High Court established by Article

154P of the Constitution by section 5A of this Act is filed in

the Court of Appeal, such appeal or application, as the case

may be, may be transferred for hearing and determination

to an appropriate High Court as may be determined by the

President of the Court of Appeal and upon such reference,

the said High Court shall hear and determine such appeal

or the application, as the case may be, as if such appeal or

application was directly made to such High Court.

Let me now advert to the 2nd preliminary objection. The learned

counsel vehemently submits that in view of section 69 of the

Partition Law, No. 21 of 1977, as amended, which states that

The court may at anytime before judgment is delivered in a

partition action add as a party to the action, on such terms as to

payment or prepayment of costs as the court may order, there is

a positive legal bar in adding the parties after the Judgment is

delivered in a partition action whether it be by the District Court

or by the Court of Appeal.

According to the learned counsel, the Court of Appeal can set

aside the Judgement and the Interlocutory Decree, but has no

jurisdiction to add parties and allow them to file statements of

claim and order retrial, in part or in full. If that argument is

accepted, after setting aside the Judgment and the Interlocutory

Decree by this Court, the case is left in limbo. I have no

hesitation in rejecting that argument in toto.

8

The bar forbidding addition of parties after the Judgement

applies to the District Court and not to the Court of Appeal. In

terms of section 48(3), the powers of the Court of Appeal to set

aside the Interlocutory and Final Decrees by way of revision

and/or restitutio in integrum to avert miscarriage of justice when

proceedings were tainted with fundamental vice have been

expressly preserved.

As the learned counsel was both serious and confident in that

submission, let me advert to only two cases to dispel any

lingering doubts.

In Gnanapandithen v. Balanayagam5, G.P.S. De Silva C.J.

concluded thus:

I am accordingly of the view that the Court of Appeal was in

serious error when it declined to exercise its revisionary

powers having regard to the very special and exceptional

circumstances of this partition case. The appeal is

accordingly allowed and the judgment of the Court of

Appeal is set aside. The judgment dated 17.10.89 of the

District Court and the interlocutory decree are also set

aside. The District Court is directed to add the petitioners-

appellants as defendants to the partition action, to permit

them to file a statement of claim, and participate at the trial.

In all the circumstances, I make no order for costs.

In Maduluwawe Sobitha Thero v. Joslin6, the petitioner filed a

revision application to set aside the Judgement, Interlocutory

Decree and the Final Decree. Wimalachandra J. concluded: 5 [1998] 1 Sri LR 391 at 397-398

9

For these reasons, I am of the strong view that this is a fit

case for this Court to intervene in the exercise of its

revisionary powers to avert a miscarriage of justice.

Accordingly, I set aside all the proceedings in the District

Court up to the stage of the plaint and permit the petitioner

to intervene in the partition action No. 389/00/P and to file

a statement of claim. The petitioner is entitled to recover Rs.

10,500 as costs of this inquiry from the plaintiff-respondent.

The learned counsels last objection is that the petitioners are

guilty of lashes. It is the position of the petitioners that they

came to know about this case when the surveyor came to the

land to prepare the final scheme of partition. Soon thereafter

they went to the District Court to add them as parties, which

was rejected by the District Court. Then they rushed to the

Provincial High Court of Civil Appeal against that order by way

of an Application for Leave to Appeal. Having realized that the

District Judges order refusing the application for want of

jurisdiction is correct, they came before this Court by way of

revision or restitutio in integrum. In my view, there is no delay.

The delay is attributable to the several unsuccessful attempts of

seeking relief from different Courts. Such delay shall be

excused.

In Biso Menika v. Cyril De Alwis7 Sharvananda J. (later C.J.)

stated:

6 [2005] 3 Sri LR 25 at 32 7 [1982] 1 Sri LR 368 at 380

10

The Court of Appeal has held that it cannot excuse the

delay caused by the petitioner's appeal to the Committee of

Inquiry set up by the present Minister in 1977. The question

is, did the delay result from the petitioner pursuing a legal

remedy, not a remedy which is extra legal. If the petitioner

has been seeking relief elsewhere in a manner provided by

the Law he cannot be guilty of culpable delay. Further the

predisposition of parties to explore other lawful avenues

which hold out reasonable expectation, of obtaining relief

without incurring the expense of coming into Court cannot

be overlooked or censored and any delay caused thereby

cannot e characterized unjustifiable.

In Rathnayaka v. Sarath, Divisional Secretary, Thihagoda8,

Wijayaratne J. stated:

It is pertinent to note that delay unexplained and undue in

the circumstances of the case only can be considered in

rejecting an application. The petitioner however has

explained the delay occasioned by the unsuccessful

application before the Provincial High Court Matara. In

those circumstances the period during the of the

proceedings before the Provincial High Court is neither

undue delay nor is it unexplained. However it is for the

court to consider whether the delay is unreasonable.

For the aforesaid reasons, I overrule all the preliminary

objections.

8 [2004] 3 Sri LR 95 at 99

11

Let me now consider the merits of the petitioners application.

As I have already stated, the petitioners grievance is that,

without their knowledge, parts of their lands have been surveyed

and included into the Preliminary Plan of this case, and they

became aware of it when the surveyor came to the land to

prepare the proposed final scheme of partition. Their short

complaint is that there is no proper identification of the corpus.

There cannot be any dispute that identification of the corpus is

of paramount importance in a partition case. That is the first

thing the District Judge shall do in a partition case. It is only

after the identification of the corpus, the District Judge shall

embark upon the arduous task of investigation of title of the

corpus. In other words, if the corpus cannot be properly

identified, investigation into the title does not arise.

In this case the plaintiffs filed the action to partition the land

known as Atambagahawatte Pitakattiya in extent of 2 Roods and

30 Perches depicted in the Surveyor Generals Plan No. 112821.9

The surveyor who prepared the Preliminary Plan has in his

Report in answering the most important question of the Report

as to whether the land surveyed is the land to be partitioned,

states that he is unable to say so, as he could not identify the

land by making a superimposition of the Surveyor Generals

Plan No. 112821 (which depicts the land to be partitioned), due

to points of fixation being changed over the years.10 According

to the surveyor, the Plan No. 112821 of the Surveyor General, a

copy of which is not found in the case record, has been prepared 9 Vide page 83 of X. 10 Vide pages 203-204 of X.

12

in or around 1870, that is, nearly 150 years ago. Then he has

drawn the Preliminary Plan depicting 2 Roods and 29.83

Perches as shown by the parties present at the survey.

There is no dispute that there is another partition case (4063/P)

pending in the same District Court to the adjoining land. The

main reason given in the petition is that a portion of the corpus

in 4063/P has been included into the Preliminary Plan in this

case. According to the copy of the plaint in 4063/P,11 the

plaintiff in that case is the 1st petitioner to this application. That

case has been filed on 24.02.2003 and this case (4513/P) on

26.06.2006.12 The learned counsel for the 6th, 11th and 12th

defendants submitted that, if that is correct, the petitioners

could have shown to the surveyor the correct land in 4063/P,

and therefore no prejudice has been caused to the petitioners

thereby. By looking at Plan No.34113 and Plan No. 1/201614, it

appears to me that a part of the land which is the subject matter

in 4063/P has been included into this case. That cannot be

done. The Judgment in this case has been delivered before the

other case as there was no contest.

According to Plan No. 1/2016, Lot Nos. 5 and 6 of the Surveyor

Generals Plan No. A699, have also been included into the

corpus of this case. Those two Lots are shown in Plan 1/2016

as C and D. Lot C is claimed by a person known as D.S.D.

Gunawardena who is not a petitioner to this application, and Lot

11 Vide page 343-347 of X. 12 Vide page 78 of X. 13 Vide page 355 of X. 14 Vide page 374 of X.

13

D is claimed by the 2nd petitioner to this application. Lot D is

Lot 6 in Plan A699.

According to the title Deeds of the 2nd petitioner15, the North of

Lot D in Plan No. 1/2016 is the land depicted in Title Plan

No.11282116, which is the subject matter of the instant action.

In other words, the plaintiffs filed this action to partition the

land depicted in Plan No.112821.

It is noteworthy that the name of the land to be partitioned and

the name of the land described in the schedules to the title

Deeds of the 2nd petitioner is the same, which is

Atambagahawatte Pitakattiya, but the land to be partitioned in

this case (4513/P), which is the land described in Plan 112821,

lies to the north of the 2nd petitioners land.

Then it is clear that there is a serious question as to the

identification of the corpus.

Hence I am of the view that the Judgment, and the Interlocutory

Decree prepared in terms of the Judgment, insofar as the

identification of the corpus is concerned, cannot be allowed to

stand.

When intervention after the Interlocutory Decree is entered is

allowed, there is no necessity in each and every case to order

trial de novo as a matter of course and direct the plaintiff to

prove his case all over again.17 The Appellate Court shall

identify the particular grievance of the aggrieved party who came

15 Vide pages 96-103 of Y. 16 Vide in particular, schedules in pages 99 and 101 of Y. 17 Vide Alasuppillai v. Yavetpillai (1949) 39 CLW 107

14

before it and give specific directions to the District Judge bearing

in mind that order for trial de novo would cause serious

inconvenience to the parties to the case. The order shall cause

minimum damage to the proceedings so far conducted in the

District Court.

This was emphasized by Soza J. in Somawathie v. Madawala18

in the following manner:

But in the circumstances of this case the extent to which the

Court should intervene in the exercise of its revisionary

powers should be given some thought. To set aside all the

proceedings would be too sweeping and cause unnecessary

hardship, inconvenience and delay. The substantial relief

which R. B. Madawela wanted when he first intervened

was the exclusion of lot 4 in plan No.3392 of 17.8.1970

made by S. T. Gunasekera Licensed Surveyor marked X9

although he could very well have staked a claim for an

undivided 3 acres from the whole land to include Lot 4. As

it is there is a well established fence on the north of Lot 4

and, as I said before, even the plaintiff's husband referred

to this Lot as R.B. Madawelas land at the first preliminary

survey. Hence it is reasonable to infer that after his

purchase in 1943, R.B. Madawela fenced off a portion with

the consent of Ensina Pereira who was the owner at that

time of the entire remainder, and began possessing it as his

own. This is Lot 4 in plan X9. Accordingly it would meet the

ends of justice if without setting aside the interlocutory

decree it is only amended by excluding from the corpus

18 [1983] 2 Sri LR 15

15

decreed to be partitioned, Lot No. 4 in plan No. 3392 (X9). I

also order the final decree and the proceedings leading up

to it from the stage of the interlocutory decree are set

aside.19

The petitioners lay no claim in the land to be partitioned in this

case, which is the land depicted in Plan No.112821. Therefore

the Judgment as to title to the land need not be disturbed. The

question relates only to the identification of the corpus. Hence

the District Judge is directed to allow the petitioners and any

other party including D.S.D. Gunawardena mentioned in Plan

No.1/2016 to intervene in the action and tender their

statements of claim in order to show why portions of the land

depicted in the Preliminary Plan in this case shall be excluded

from the corpus. In that process, (a) the Court Commissioner

can be directed to superimpose the Preliminary Plan in 4063/P

on the Preliminary Plan in this case, and (b) the Government

Surveyor on behalf of the Surveyor General or the Court

Commissioner can be directed to superimpose Lots 5 and 6 of

Title Plan A699 referred to in Plan 1/2016 on the Preliminary

Plan. However, this shall not prevent the parties to this case

from claiming prescriptive title to those portions, if so advised.

Insofar as the identification of the corpus is concerned, the

Judgment and the Interlocutory Decree entered are set aside

and the learned District Judge is directed to deliver a separate

order and enter an amended Interlocutory Decree after further

evidence is, if necessary, recorded on the above directions.

19 At page 32

16

Application of the petitioners are allowed. No costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal