IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1. Mrs. A.M.M.K. Moragalla,

2. Siransi Leela Naotunna,

3. C.E.B.M.R. Suranganee Dilrukshi

Gunaratna (nee Delwita)

4. Niranjal Delwita,

5. Roshan Piyadarshana Delwita

6. Kisagothami De Silva (nee Delwita)

(3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th Petitioners

appearing by their Attorney,

Kusumanjali Delwita-7th

Respondent)

7. Kusumanjali Delwita,

All of 82/12E,

3rd Baptist Lane,

Baddegama,

Pitakotte.

Petitioners

CASE NO: CA/76/2016/WRIT

Vs.

1. The Land Reform Commission,

2. Sumanatissa Thambugala,

Chairman,

3. R.P. Rajapaksha,

Commissioner General of Lands,

2

4. M.A.S. Weerasinghe,

Commissioner General of Agrarian

Development,

5. R.A. Wijethunga,

Director General of Agrarian

Development,

6. Montague Sarath Chandra,

Member,

7. Hema Darmawardane,

Member,

8. K.D.R. Olga,

Member,

All of

C82,

Hector Kobbekaduva Mawatha,

Colombo 7.

9. Manohari Sunilkanthi Madugalle

(Deceased),

(Presently her interests are looked

after by 10th and 11th

Respondents)

10. Chula Madugalle,

185/1/A,

Epitamulla Road,

Kotte.

11. Mahen Susantha Madugalle,

168/16,

Siripura Gardens,

Rajamaha Vihara Mawatha,

Kotte.

Respondents

3

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Chula Bandara for the Petitioners.

Dr. Sunil Cooray for the 1st and 2nd Respondents.

H. Withanachchi for the 10th Respondent.

Argued on: 23.05.2018

Written Submissions:

By the Petitioner on 20.07.2018

By the 10th Respondent on 03.08.2018

By the 1st and 2nd Respondents on 13.08.2018

Decided on: 06.09.2018

Samayawardhena, J.

Brenda Halangoda (nee Delwita) passed away leaving a Last Will

(which was later proved and admitted to Probate) whereby she

bequeathed all her immovable properties to her sister Mildred

Madugalle (nee Delwita) and brother Victor Delwita subject to the

life interest of her husband Harry Halangoda.

Both Mildred Madugalle (nee Delwita) and Victor Delwita are now

deceased, and the widower of the 1st petitioner and the 2nd-7th

petitioners are the children of the latter, and the 9th-11th

respondents are those of the former.

Harry Halangoda, before his death, being the life interest holder of

his deceased wife's properties, is reported to have made a

(purported) Statutory Declaration in terms of section 18 of the

Land Reform Law, No.1 of 1972, as amended. Notwithstanding the

fact that there is no dispute about making such Declaration, no

copy of the said Statutory Declaration has been tendered to Court

4

for the Court to understand what Harry Halangoda has in fact

declared in it.

The petitioners by producing P2 dated 18.03.2009 and P3 dated

13.07.2009 state that they "appealed to the Land Reform

Commission claiming their due shares of the land" and the

Commission recognised their rights by P4 dated 08.03.2012.

The petitioners produce documents P6-P10 to say that the 1st

respondent, the Land Reform Commission, agreed to give

alternative lands.

The Land Reform Commission has made a Statutory Determination

and the same has been published in terms of section 19 of the

Land Reform Law, in the Gazette marked P5 dated 16.10.2012.

It is noteworthy that all those letters referred to earlier marked P2,

P3, and also P4, P6, P7, P8, P9 have been exchanged before the

Statutory Determination P5 was published. However, in terms of

section 20 of the Land Reform Law, Statutory Determination shall

come into effect on the date of the publication of it in the Gazette.

I must also add that there is no document before this Court to

ascertain when the Statutory Determination was made. Statutory

Determination refers to one land and those letters refer to different

lands.

It shall also be mentioned that all the letters P4, P6, P7, P8, P9

sent by the Land Reform Commission have been addressed to the

10th respondent. P10 which is dated subsequent to the Statutory

Determination is also addressed to the same respondent. The 10th

respondent does not support the petitioners application. She seeks

the dismissal of it.

5

As the matter was getting delayed, the petitioners have filed a writ

application (CA/WRIT/194/2014) seeking a writ of mandamus

compelling the 1st and 2nd respondents to allocate their due share

of the land, which is 25 acres. This 25 acre land is not the land or

portion of it as described in the Statutory Determination published

in the Gazette P5. Thereafter that writ application has been

withdrawn upon realisation during the course of the proceedings

that the earlier Determination contained in Gazette P5 has

subsequently been cancelled by Gazette marked 1R3 dated

09.07.2014.

It is against this backdrop, the petitioners have filed this

application seeking mandates to quash the Gazette Notification

marked 1R3 by way of writ of certiorari; and to compel the

respondents to act according to the Gazette Notification marked P5

by way of writ of mandamus.

Learned counsel for the petitioners at page 9 of his written

submissions states that from the submission made by learned

counsel for the Land Reform Commission at the stage of argument,

following are the three questions to be decided by this Court.

1. Was the Declaration made under section 18 of the Land

Reform Law by Harry Halangoda contrary to section 3(4) of

the said Law as he was not the owner?

2. Was the Gazette 1R3 cancelling the previous Gazette P5

legal?

3. Did the petitioners have locus standi to present this

application and to seek relief as prayed for in the petition?

6

Learned counsel for the petitioners concedes that it is the owner of

the agricultural land who can make a Statutory Declaration, and

quotes section 3(4) of the Law which defines the word "owner", in

support of his argument that Harry Halangoda was entitled to

make the said Statutory Declaration.

Section 3(4) of the Land Reform Law reads as follows:

For the purpose of subsection (1)

a) where any land is subject to a mortgage, lease, usufruct or life

interest, the mortgagor, the lessor or the person in whom the

title to the land subject to the usufruct or life interest is; and

b) where any land is held on a permit or a grant issued under

the Land Development Ordinance, the permit-holder or the

alienee on such grant,

c) where any land is owned by a trustee under a private trust

for the benefit of any other person, the private trust;

shall be deemed to be the owner of such agricultural land:

Immediately after quoting the said section, learned counsel

correctly states that "the section 3(4)(a) of the Land Reform Law

clearly states that where any land is subject to a life interest, the

person in whom the title to the land subject to the life interest shall

be deemed to be the owner of such agricultural land" and thereafter,

surprisingly, states that "So there was no illegality irregularity in

the declaration made under section 18 of the Land Reform Law

made by Harry Halangoda as the life interest holder of his wife's

properties." If Harry Halangoda was the life interest holder who

could only enjoy the land during his lifetime without ownership, he

could not have made the Statutory Declaration in terms of section

3(4)(a) and only the person or persons in whom title to the land

resided could make that Declaration.

7

Hence the Declaration which Harry Halangoda is said to have

made has no force or avail in law and therefore void ab initio. The

Statutory Determination made earlier on that void Declaration on

misapprehension of the law could in my view be formerly cancelled

when the Land Reform Commission later realised it.

Section 18 of the Interpretation Ordinance, No. 21 of 1901, as

amended, reads as follows:

Where any enactment, whether passed before or after the

commencement of this Ordinance, confers power on any

authority to issue any proclamation, or make any order or

notification, any proclamation, order, or notification so issued

or made may be at any time amended, varied, rescinded, or

revoked by the same authority and in the same manner, and

subject to the like consent and conditions, if any, by or in

which or subject to which such proclamation, order, or

notification may be issued or made.

Learned counsel for the petitioners at pages 12-13 of the written

submissions quoting section 18 of the Interpretation Ordinance

states that "although in section 18 of the Interpretation Ordinance

gives the right to revoke/cancel a previous decision, it does not

mean that such authority could use the provisions contained in the

said section 18 without following the procedural requirements", i.e.

without giving an opportunity to the petitioners to show cause why

the earlier Gazette P5 should not be cancelled.

Notwithstanding there is some force in that argument, as the

petitioners got the opportunity to express their grievances through

these proceedings and as this Court is satisfied that the Land

Reform Commission had a valid legal basis to cancel the earlier

8

Determination made upon misapprehension of the law, I am not

inclined to hold with the petitioners to quash the later Gazette 1R3

allowing to perpetuate the illegality with the blessings of Court

until the Land Reform Commission comes to the same conclusion

for the second time upon a formal inquiry. Court need not in my

view make orders for the sake of making orders.

The final point raised by learned counsel for the petitioners was

based on legitimate expectation. As I have already stated, almost

all the documents which the petitioners rely on relate to the period

anterior to the publication of the Statutory Determination; and the

alternative lands referred to therein are unrelated to the land

referred to in the Declaration or Determination; and those letters

are addressed to the 10th respondent who in her objection seeks to

dismiss the application of the petitioners. Hence, legitimate

expectation is hard to establish. The Statutory Determination,

which is void ab initio, cannot form the foundation for legitimate

expectation. Legitimate expectation cannot be founded upon

illegality or nullity.

Application of the petitioners is dismissed but without costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal