==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/193/2020

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979, read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT

Court of Appeal Case No:

CA/HCC /0193/2020 Rajapathirage Ajith Rohan Perera

High Court of Colombo

Case No. HC/8232/2016

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

Rajapathirage Ajith Rohan Perera

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

CA/HCC/193/2020

2 | P a g e

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : I.B.Sachitra Harshana for the Appellant.

Shanaka Wijesinghe, PC, ASG for the

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 23/02/2026

DECIDED ON : 22/05/2026

***************************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted in the High Court of Colombo under Section 296 of

the Penal Code for committing the murder of Rajapathirage Gamini Philipian

Perera on 30.12.2013.

The trial commenced before the High Court Judge of Colombo as the

Appellant had opted for a non-jury trial. After the conclusion of the

prosecution case, the Learned High Court Judge had called for the defence

CA/HCC/193/2020

3 | P a g e

and the Appellant made a dock statement from the dock and closed his case.

After considering the evidence presented by both parties, the Learned High

Court Judge had convicted the Appellant as charged and sentenced him to

death on 30.11.2020.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent to argue this matter in his absence. Also, at the time of

argument the Appellant was connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant raised only one ground of appeal on

behalf of the Appellant. He contended that the circumstantial evidence led at

the trial is insufficient to convict the Appellant for the charge of murder.

Background of the case is albeit as follows:

The deceased is the brother of the Appellant. He was unmarried and had

lived in the same house (an apartment) of the Appellant. But the Appellant

had chased him out and the deceased had been sleeping outside, in the

corridor of the apartment.

According to PW1, Nishantha, on 31.12.2013, he had seen the deceased lying

fallen with bleeding injuries at the corridor of the second floor of the

apartment. He had lodged the first complaint to the police at 6.37am.

According to him a dispute had existed between the Appellant and the

deceased regarding the ownership of the apartment where both lived. After

being chased out from the house by the Appellant, the deceased used to sleep

in the corridor of the flat, which the Appellant did not like.

PW3 Sriyani Perera is the sister of the deceased, and the Appellant and PW4

Kalum a neighbor also confirmed the existence of a property dispute between

CA/HCC/193/2020

4 | P a g e

the deceased and the Appellant, and both had seen the deceased lying fallen

with injuries at the corridor of the second floor of the apartment.

PW2, Chamara Sampath, the son of the Appellant, also confirmed the

existence of a dispute over the apartment between his father and the

deceased. Additionally, he revealed that his Accused-father always

threatened the deceased that he was going to assault the deceased. This had

happened on the previous night as well.

As per the witnesses, the Appellant after hearing about the death of the

deceased, without inquiring or trying to assist anybody, simply went down

from the flat. He had not taken any plausible steps to assist the police.

Police had arrived at the crime scene at 7.30am and had arrested the

Appellant at 12.00pm. PW8, SI/ Weerasinghe had recovered a mamoty under

the bed of the Appellant upon the statement of the Appellant, which was

marked under Section 27(1) of the Evidence Ordinance.

As the Mamoty contained blood stains and two pieces of hair shafts, the same

was sent for DNA analysis to Genetech, Colombo. According to the report

provided by PW14, Dr. Illeperuma, he confirmed that the blood found on the

Mamoty and the blood sample obtained from the deceased’s body has

matched perfectly.

According to PW13, Dr. Rasanjalee, then JMO who held the post mortem

examination submitted that the deceased had sustained 21 injuries and the

injury No.10 which caused the death of the deceased, could be by a blunt

weapon such as a Mamoty which had been recovered upon the statement of

the Appellant.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant contended that the Learned High

Court Judge has failed to appreciate that the circumstantial evidence led at

the trial is insufficient to convict the Appellant for the charge of murder.

In this case the witness PW2, and PW3 in their evidence divulged the

questionable conduct of the Appellant in committing this murder.

CA/HCC/193/2020

5 | P a g e

The behavior or conduct of an accused person, would be of extreme

importance and relevance in criminal proceedings, as such conduct could

serve as circumstantial evidence which would be necessary to secure a

conviction. The conduct before and after the commission of an alleged crime

would have to be assessed, and as per Section 8(2) of the Evidence

Ordinance, the conduct would be admissible if it is influenced by, or if it

influences, a fact in issue.

In the case of S.C. Appeal No. 118/2022, decided on 16.05.2025 it was

reaffirmed by the Supreme Court that:

“When considering a case on circumstantial evidence, Court has to bear

in mind that the prosecution must prove beyond reasonable doubt that

the circumstantial evidence led at the trial must only be consistent with

the guilt of the appellant and not with any other hypothesis.”

In Junaiden Mohamed Haaris, vs. Hon. Attorney General, SC Appeal

118/17 SC (SC minutes 09/11/2018), the Supreme Court held:

“The prosecution relied entirely on circumstantial evidence to establish

the charges, for the reason that there were no eyewitnesses to

substantiate any of the charges against the Accused-Appellant. Thus, it

was incumbent on the prosecution to establish that the ‘circumstances’

the prosecution relied on, are consistent only with the guilt of the

accused-appellant and not with any other hypothesis.

Regard should be had to a set of principles and rules of prudence,

developed in a series of English decisions, which are now regarded as

settled law by our courts.

CA/HCC/193/2020

6 | P a g e

The two basic principles are-

(i) The inference sought to be drawn must be consistent with all

the proved facts, if it is not, then the inference cannot be

drawn.

(ii) The proved facts should be such that they exclude every

reasonable inference from them, save the one to be drawn. If

they do not exclude other reasonable inferences, then there

must be a doubt whether the inference sought to be drawn is

correct (per Watermeyer J. in R vs. Blom 1939 A.D. 188)

The rule regarding the exclusion of every hypothesis of innocence before

drawing the inference of guilt was laid down way back in 1838 in the

case of R vs. Hodges (1838 2 Lew. cc.227). The circumstances must be

such as to produce moral certainty to the exclusion of every reasonable

doubt.”

In the case of Kusumadasa v. State (2011) 1 Sri L.R. 240 it was held:

“In a case of circumstantial evidence, if the proved facts are compatible

with the innocence of the accused, he cannot be convicted of the offence.

Further if the proved facts are not consistent with the guilt of the

accused, he cannot be convicted for the offence. In a case of

circumstantial evidence, it is the duty of the trial Judge to tell the jury

that such evidence must be totally inconsistent with the innocence of the

accused and must only be consistent with his guilt. In order to base a

conviction on circumstantial evidence, the jury must be satisfied that the

evidence was consistent with the guilt of the accused and inconsistent -

with any reasonable hypothesis of his innocence.

The prosecution must prove that no one else other than the accused had

the opportunity of committing the offence. The accused can be found

CA/HCC/193/2020

7 | P a g e

guilty and only if the proved items of circumstantial evidence is

consistent with their guilt and inconsistent with their innocence.”

The evidence given by PW2, and PW3 clearly establish that a dispute had

existed between the Appellant and the deceased. According to PW2, the

Appellant had used to tell that he was going to attack the deceased. In fact,

he had mentioned the same on the previous night. This evidence would

highly incriminate the Appellant, as it was divulged by his son.

Although it is necessary for the prosecution to prove the mens rea of a

defendant in the commission of a crime, in order to secure a conviction in a

criminal case, they are not required to prove the reason why the defendant

actually did it. In other words, it is not a requirement to prove the motive to

secure a conviction in a criminal case. However, if a motive can be

established, it would serve as crucial circumstantial evidence which would

assist in proving the identity or the intent, especially in situations where

other evidence is not strong enough.

E.R.S.R. Coomaraswamy in his book The Law of Evidence Vol 1 at 224

discusses the relevancy of the motive in the following manner;

“Though motive is not a necessary fact, the presence of motive is

intensely relevant, as tending to establish either the actus reus or

mens rea, or both, except perhaps in certain statutory offences. If a

substantive case as to the motive has been put forward, the evidence

must be considered. The existence of motive may explain facts which

would be otherwise difficult to explain. It is also relevant and important

on the question of intention”

In this case the prosecution had presented evidence of the existence of a

dispute between the Appellant and the deceased. The evidence given by PW2

and PW3 had clearly established the existence of a motive.

CA/HCC/193/2020

8 | P a g e

Further, although a Counsel was represented, the defence had failed to cross

examine PW1, PW2, PW3 and PW4 whose evidence went into the proceedings

uncontested. A plethora of judgements both delivered in Sri Lankan as well

as in Indian courts endorsed the fact that absence of cross examination of

prosecution witnesses of certain facts leads to inference of admission of that

fact.

In the case of Premawansha v. Attorney General [2009] 2 SLR 205 it was

held:

“Absence of cross examination of prosecution witness of certain facts

leads to inference of admission of that fact.”

In the case of Sarwan Singh v. State of Punjab AIR 2002 SC 3652, the

Indian Supreme Court held:

“It is the rule of essential justice that whenever the opponent has

declined to avail himself of the opportunity to put his case in cross-

examination it must follow that the evidence tendered on that issue

ought to be accepted.'”

In the case of Himachal Pradesh v. Thakur Dass (1983) 2 CrL L.J. 1694 at

1983 held:

"Whenever a statement of fact made by a witness is not challenged in

cross examination, it has to be concluded that the fact in question is not

disputed.' 'Absence of cross-examination of prosecution witness of

certain facts leads to an inference of admission of that fact.”

In the case of Wannaku Arachchilage Gunapala v. AG 2007 (1) SLR 273 it

was held that:

“No questions were asked from him in cross examination as to the

nature or the type of the weapon used. It appears that the nature or the

CA/HCC/193/2020

9 | P a g e

type of the weapon was not put in issue instead the Counsel for the

defense had challenged this witness only on the basis that the witness

did not see the incident or the weapon that was used in the commission

of the crime. Therefore, we find that it is not in the mouth of the accused

now, to take up all these objections that were not raised at the trial.”

As per Section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance of Sri Lanka, information given

by an accused in police custody would be admissible if it directly leads to a

relevant fact being discovered. The specific portion of the statement in

relation to the discovery is admissible, which is an exception to prohibitions

on confessions made to the police.

In the case of Somaratne Rajapakse and Others v. Attorney General

(2010) 2 SLR 113 it was held:

“A discovery made in terms of Section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance

discloses that the information given was true and that the accused had

the knowledge of the existence and the whereabouts of the actual

discovery. Therefore, as has been adopted by T. S. Fernando, J. in

Piyadasa v. The Queen following the Indian decision in Kottaya v.

Emperor, that if a fact is actually discovered in consequence of

information given, some guarantee is afforded thereby that the

information was true’. It was therefore held that such information could

be ‘safely allowed to be given in evidence”

In this above-mentioned case, the case which analysed the rationale

underlying this proviso, Thurtell v. Hunt (1825) Notable British Trials, 145

was cited, which held:

“A confession obtained by saying to the party, “you had better confess

or it will be the worse for you’ is not legal evidence. But, though such a

confession is not legal evidence, it is everyday practice that if, in the

CA/HCC/193/2020

10 | P a g e

course of such confession, that party states where stolen goods or a

body may be found and they are found accordingly, this is evidence,

because the fact of the finding proves the truth of the allegation, and

his evidence in this respect is not vitiated by the hopes or threats that

may have been held out to him.”

In the case of Nandasena v. Republic of Sri Lanka (1978–79) 2 SLR 235 it

was held:

“Section 27 is based on the doctrine of confirmation by sub sequent

facts. Even though evidence relating to confessional or other statements

made by a person, whilst in the custody of a police officer, is tainted and

therefore inadmissible, if the truth of the information given by him is

assured by the discovery of a fact, it may be presumed to be untainted

and is, therefore, declared provable in so far as it distinctly relates to

the fact thereby discovered. Only that portion of the information can be

proved which relates distinctly to the facts discovered.”

In this case, a Mamoty was recovered upon the statement given by the

Appellant. Although this recovery only imputes the knowledge of the

Appellant, with the other evidence lead by the prosecution had certainly

strengthened the prosecution case.

Notably, PW8 had not been cross examined on whether he used any threat

or duress when recording the Appellant’s statement. Further, it has been

noted that neither the ingredients of the 27(1) recoveries nor the chain of

custody for the items recovered, had been cross examined or highlighted.

Further, as per the evidence of PW14 the blood sample found on the head of

the mamoty is compatible with the blood samples taken from the deceased’s

body. This, together with the incriminating evidence against the Appellant

such as the Appellant’s conduct, the actual recovery of the weapon on the

CA/HCC/193/2020

11 | P a g e

Appellant’s statement and the injuries on the deceased’s body. Such

evidence would therefore make the prosecution’s case more substantial.

Under Section 45 of the Evidence Ordinance, DNA (Deoxyribose Nucleic Acid)

can be admitted as expert evidence, and such evidence has been accepted as

seen in Sri Lankan case law, in situations such as to identify perpetrators in

criminal cases or to establish paternity. Many notable cases in this regard

would be the Hokandara murder, the Sarath Ambepitiya murder and the

Royal Park murder, where the use of DNA profiling assisted in corroboration

of circumstantial evidence or in the identification of suspects.

In the case of Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or

Corruption v. Indiketiya Hewage Kusumdasa Mahanama and Another

SC TAB 1A & 1B/2020 decided on 11 January 2023 it was observed in detail:

“Additionally, admission of evidence of novel sciences for the purposes

of identification is not a foreign experience for Sri Lankan Courts. For

instance, the leading of evidence as to identification through DNA typing

and fingerprints in the Sajeewa Alias Ukkuwa and Others V. The

Attorney General (Hokandara Case) (2004) 2 SLR 263 as early as 1999

made history as the first case to consider DNA evidence in Sri Lanka.

Thereafter, the use of DNA evidence as corroborative evidence in the

case of The Attorney-General V. Potta Naufer and Others (Ambepitiya

Murder Case) (2007) 2 SLR 144, with extensive elaboration of the

methodology and science supporting the use of DNA typing, are both

instances of leading expert evidence for the purposes of identification.

Given the technological advancement, especially with the use of

personal devices as smartphones and personal computers, the outlook

on technological evidence must be altered significantly, making room for

modern realities which could not have been contemplated by legislators

at the time of the enactment of certain legislation effecting such

CA/HCC/193/2020

12 | P a g e

evidence. It is evident that the evolution of technology has outpaced the

parallel development of law, and oft it has been demonstrated in cases

as the above, that practical necessity being demonstrated in cases,

leads to the opinions of courts preceding and influencing eventual

legislative amendments encompassing such opinions.

The identification of individuals, earlier being a selected few methods

has undeniably advanced during the current millennia. For instance, the

development of biometric technology for identification, including

methods as facial and retinal recognition, have drastically increased in

accuracy.

However, in terms of legal admissibility of evidence based on novel

sciences, it is entirely dependent on factors that include those

considered above and is undeniably subjective to each individual

circumstance, the science concerned, the specific methodology used,

and the error margin involved. In the instant case, applying all the above

tests and taking the expert evidence into account, with due regard to the

methodology used in this specific circumstance, we find that “Voice

Analysis” in the manner conducted by Witness Gunathilake, is in fact a

“Science” which falls under Section 45 of the Evidence Ordinance.”

In the case of Weerasinghe v Jayasinghe (2007) 2 SLR 50 it was held:

“(1) In cases where parentage (paternity) is in issue the most cogent

evidence is likely to be obtained by blood tests in general and DNA tests

in particular. Such tests may be used either to rebut the presumption or

allegation of paternity or to establish marriage".

(2) DNA profiling can establish parentage with a virtual certainty; DNA

tests are also known as genetic finger printing could by matching the

alleged father's DNA bands with that of the child's bands after excluding

CA/HCC/193/2020

13 | P a g e

such bands that match the mother's would make positive finding of

paternity with virtual certainty.

(3) The DNA test could be used by the appellant to rebut the allegation

of paternity.”

In this case in order to find the Appellant guilty of the charge, all the

circumstances must point at him that he is the one who committed the

murder of the deceased and not anybody else. It is the incumbent duty of

the prosecution to prove the same beyond reasonable doubt.

The Learned High Court Judge had expressly mentioned that he had applied

the principles governing the evaluation of circumstantial evidence, and had

considered all the circumstances to come to his conclusion. The Learned

High Court Judge had correctly narrated all the witnesses who gave evidence

in his judgment.

In the case of C.Chenga Reddy and others v. State of A.P.(1996) 10 SCC

193 the court held that:

“In a case based on circumstantial evidence, the settled law is that the

circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is drawn should be

fully proved and such circumstances must be conclusive in nature.

Moreover, all the circumstances should be complete and there should be

no gap left in the chain of evidence. Further the proved circumstances

must be consistent only with the hypothesis of guilt of the accused and

totally inconsistent with his innocence”.

In the case of McGreevy v. Director of Public Prosecution [1973] 1

W.L.R.276 the court held that:

“There is no requirement, in cases in which the prosecution’s case is

based on circumstantial evidence that the judge direct the jury to acquit

unless they are sure of the facts proved are not only consistent with guilt

but also inconsistent with any other reasonable conclusion. The question

CA/HCC/193/2020

14 | P a g e

for the jury is whether the facts as they find them to be drive them to

the conclusion, so that they are sure, that the defendant is guilty”.

In the case of Attorney General v. Potta Naufer & others [2007) 2 SLR

144 the court held that:

“When relying on circumstantial evidence to establish the charge of

conspiracy to commit murder and the charge of murder, the proved items

of circumstantial evidence when taken together must irresistibly point

towards the only inference that the accused committed the offence”.

In Premawansha v. Attorney General [2009] 2 SLR 205 the court held

that:

“In circumstantial evidence if an inference of guilt is to be drawn, such

an inference must be the one and only irresistible and inescapable

conclusion that the accused committed the offence”.

Guided by the above-mentioned judgments, I conclude that the items of

circumstantial evidence led in this trial are sufficient to arrive at the

conclusion that the Appellant is the person who committed the murder of

the deceased.

As discussed under the only appeal ground raised, the prosecution had

adduced strong and incriminating circumstantial evidence against the

Appellant. The Learned High Court Judge had very correctly analyzed all the

evidence presented by both parties and concluded that the Appellant is guilty

of the charge of murder.

CA/HCC/193/2020

15 | P a g e

As the Learned High Court Judge had rightly convicted the Appellant for the

charge of murder, I affirm the conviction and dismiss the Appeal of the

Appellant.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Colombo along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL