IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Udumil Marikkar Sara Umma,

Maikkulama,

Chilaw.

1A Defendant-Appellant

CASE NO: CA/350/2000 (F)

DC CHILAW CASE NO: 22821/E

Vs.

Mohideen Ebrahim Siththi Afilar

Umma,

No. 56,

Old Town,

Madampe.

And 5 Others

Plaintiff-Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Sudarshani Cooray with W. Madawalagama

for the 1A Defendant-Appellant.

Ranjan Suwandaratna, P.C., with Anil

Rajakaruna for the Plaintiff-Respondents.

Decided on: 13.03.2019

2

Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiffs filed this action against the five defendants in the

District Court seeking declaration of title to the land described

in the schedule to the plaint, ejectment of the defendants

therefrom and damages. The defendants filed answers seeking

dismissal of the plaintiffs action. After trial the learned District

Judge entered Judgment for the plaintiffs as prayed for except

damages. Being aggrieved by the said Judgment only the 1st

defendant has preferred this appeal.

The learned counsel for the 1st defendant-appellant has, in

paragraph 11 of the written submissions dated 25.06.2012,

candidly admitted that the plaintiff-respondents proved paper

title to the land in suit at the trial. The appellant has no paper

title to the land.

However, the learned counsel, in paragraph 13 of the said

written submissions, argues that as the respondents took up the

position that the appellant came to the property as a licensee

under them, the burden was on the respondents to prove that

fact, and as it has not been proved, the respondents cannot

succeed in this action.

I am unable to agree with that argument. It is well settled law

that in a rei vindicatio action such as this, once the paper title is

proved by the plaintiff, the burden shifts to the defendant to

prove on what basis he is in possession of the land, because the

paper title holder has a legal right to possess the land.1 In other

1 Theivandran v. Ramanathan Chettiar [1986] 2 Sri LR 219 at 222, Candappa nee Bastian v. Ponnambalam Pillai [1993] 1 Sri LR 184 at 187, Beebi Johara v. Warusavitharana [1998] 3 Sri LR 9, Wijetunga v. Thangarajah [1999] 1 Sri LR 53, Leisa v. Simon [2002] 1 Sri LR 148

3

words, possession is one of the essential attributes of ownership.

There is no legal requirement that the owner must possess the

land.

In this case, the appellant has not proved on what basis he is in

possession notwithstanding the paper title to the land is

admittedly with the respondents. All his defences taken up at

the trial as crystallized in issues are technical. They are: (a)

whether there is a mis-joinder of causes of action and parties,

(b) whether no cause of action has been revealed, (c) whether

leave and license has not been terminated, and (d) whether

testamentary case was filed upon the death of Haniffa. The

learned District Judge has rightly answered those issues against

the appellant, and the appellant does not contest those findings

before this Court.

The learned counsel for the appellant in the said written

submissions also admits that no issue was raised at the trial

claiming title to the land on prescription.

However, the new counsel for the appellant, tendering undated

additional written submissions, emphasizing that it is the duty

of the learned District Judge, in terms of section 146 of the Civil

Procedure Code, to frame issues, invites this Court to raise an

issue on prescription and answer it in favour of the appellant or

remit the case to the District Court for a retrial.

Even though the appellate Court can raise an issue in deciding

the appeal in a rare case, the appellate Court will not, unless

there are compelling, cogent reasons to do so, raise an issue on

prescription in a rei vindication action, which is purely a

question of fact as opposed to a question of law. Plea of

4

prescription must (a) specifically be pleaded and (b) put in issue

in the trial Court. Both shall be done if one is to succeed on

prescription. Far from raising a plea of prescription in appeal,

plea of prescription cannot be raised even in the middle of the

trial as you go along.2 It is a special plea, which defeats, if

proved, the title of the true owner, which is a serious thing.

Hence, if the defendant decides to take up a plea of prescription

at the trial, the plaintiff, as the true owner, shall clearly know it

at the very beginning of the trial in order for him to marshal

evidence to defeat that defence. How can the defendant make it

known to the plaintiff? That is none other than by raising a

specific issue on it. This principle, in my view, shall apply not

only to rei vindicatio actions, but also to all other actions.

Parties can plead anything in the pleadings. But they do not

want all what they plead to put in issue at the trial. Ultimately

the case is decided on the issues raised. There was no issue on

prescription in this case.

The learned District Judge was fully aware of his responsibilities

arising out of section 149 of the Civil Procedure Code, and in the

course of the Judgment has raised three additional issues on

which the right decision of the case appeared to him to depend.

On how the trial proceeded, he has not considered prescription

as one of the matters on which the right decision of the case

depended.

The learned District Judge has, however, considered

prescription and stated that the plaintiffs have leased out the

coconut trees in the land in suit for third parties for plucking

coconuts and tapping toddy. According to the learned Judge, 2 Gnananathan v. Premawardena [1999] 3 Sri LR 301

5

the Deed of Lease marked P5 goes to show that the coconut

trees have been leased for that purpose between 1983-1987, and

the case has been filed on 23.03.1987, and therefore, plea of

prescription in any event cannot succeed.3 I find that Deed P5

is exactly relevant to the land in issue and it has been marked

without any objection and without subject to proof.4 That

means, the appellant had not been in full control of the land to

claim by prescription, even if there was an issue on prescription.

He has not had ut dominus possession.

Under those circumstances, a grave prejudice would be caused

to the respondents if this Court is to raise an issue on

prescription for the first time in appeal and rewrite the

Judgment afresh or send the case for retrial as 19 years have

passed since the filing of the action. There shall be a finality in

litigation.

Judgment of the District Court is affirmed and the appeal is

dismissed with costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

3 Vide page 275 of the Brief. 4 Vide page 146 of the Brief.