IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Gratian Kingsley Goonewardena,

No. 154,

Ramya Road,

Colombo 4.

Respondent-Respondent-

Petitioner

CASE NO: CA/PHC/APN/182/2017

HC JAFFNA REVISION APPLICATION NO: 1978/16

PRIMARY COURT OF MALLAKAM CASE NO: PC/4/2014

Vs.

Vallipuram Vishnukaran,

Manippay Road,

Kopay Central,

Kopay.

Informant-Petitioner-Respondent

Before: A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Harsha Fernando for the Petitioner.

K.V.S. Ganesharajan for the Respondent.

Argued on: 10.12.2019

Decided on: 19.12.2019

Website Copy Website Copy

2

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The respondent-respondent-petitioner (hereinafter the

petitioner) filed this revision application before this Court

against the Judgment of the High Court of Jaffna dated

02.11.2017. By the said Judgment, the High Court set aside the

order of the Magistrates Court dated 12.05.2016.

The learned counsel for the informant-petitioner-respondent

(hereinafter the respondent) has taken up a preliminary

objection to the maintainability of this revision application on

the basis that the petitioner has failed to aver in the petition why

he could not come before this Court by way of final appeal

against the Judgment of the High Court as provided for by

Article 154P(6) of the Constitution read with Rule 2(1)(a) of the

Court of Appeal (Procedure for Appeals from High Courts) Rules

1988.

Article 154P(6) of the Constitution reads as follows:

Subject to the provisions of the Constitution and any law,

any person aggrieved by a final order, judgement or

sentence of any such Court, in the exercise of its jurisdiction

under paragraphs (3)(b) or (3)(c) or (4) may appeal therefrom

to the Court of Appeal in accordance with Article 138.

Rule 2(1)(a) of the Court of Appeal (Procedure for Appeals from

High Courts) Rules 1988 reads as follows:

Any person who shall be dissatisfied with any judgment or

final order or sentence pronounced by a High Court in the

exercise of the appellate or revisionary jurisdiction vested in

it by Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution may prefer an

Website Copy Website Copy

3

appeal to the Court of Appeal against such judgment for

any error in law, or in fact-

(a) by lodging within fourteen days from the time of

such judgment or order being passed or made with

such High Court, a petition of appeal addressed to

the Court of Appeal

There is no dispute that the petitioner has not averred in the

petition of this revision application why he did not exercise his

right of appeal.

During the course of argument, in defence, the learned counsel

for the petitioner first submitted that in terms of section 74(2) of

the Primary Courts Procedure Act, No. 44 of 1979, An appeal

shall not lie against any determination or order, and, therefore,

revision is the only remedy.

This revision application has been filed against the Judgment of

the High Court (delivered in the exercise of the revisionary

jurisdiction granted under Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution)

setting aside the order of the Magistrates Court made under

section 66 of the Primary Courts Procedure Act.

Section 74(2) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act is applicable

to orders of the Magistrates Court and not against Judgments of

the High Court.

Hence, this argument is bound to fail.

The next argument of the learned counsel is that, as the

Judgment of the High Court is ex facie wrong, the petitioner has

opted to come before this Court by way of revision, rather than

by way of final appeal.

Website Copy Website Copy

4

According to the argument of the learned counsel, the petitioner

can first decide whether or not the Judgment is ex facie

erroneous, and then decide whether to come before this Court

against that Judgment by way of final appeal or revision.

I have no hesitation in rejecting that argument on first

principles.

If the Judgment is ex facie erroneous, I cannot understand why

this Court cannot set it aside on appeal. There is absolutely no

legal impediment to do so.

When there is a right of appeal, the party dissatisfied with the

Judgment shall come by way of appeal.

It does not mean that a party who has the right of appeal shall

necessarily come by way of appeal.

The revisionary jurisdiction of this Court is wide, and the Court

can in an appropriate case exercise that jurisdiction whether or

not an appeal lies against a Judgment.

However, as this Court held in Pradeshiya Sabha of Wattala v.

Assistant Commissioner of Labour1:

One cannot invoke the extraordinary jurisdiction of this

Court by way of revision as of right. Revision is a

discretionary remedy. When a right of appeal is available

against a Judgment or Order, a party who did not exercise

that right is ought to give an explanation in his application

why he did not exercise that right in the event he decides to

1 CA/PHC/APN/124/2016, CAM on 25.07.2019

Website Copy Website Copy

5

come before the Appellate Court by way of revision instead

of appeal.

According to Rule 2(1)(a) of the Court of Appeal Rules 1988,

which I quoted above, any person who shall be dissatisfied with

any Judgment of a High Court can prefer an appeal to the Court

of Appeal against such Judgment for any error in law or in fact

within fourteen days from the date of the Judgment. The right of

appeal is available to any person dissatisfied with any

Judgment. The degree of dissatisfaction, which is subjective, is

irrelevant and beside the point. Such a construction leads to

absurdity.

The learned counsel does not give any other reason why the

petitioner did not come by way of final appeal and why he did

not state it in the petition.

In my view, the preliminary objection raised by the learned

counsel for the respondent is entitled to succeed and the

application is liable to be dismissed on that ground alone.

Without prejudice to the above conclusion, let me briefly

consider the petitioners application on merits.

The respondent instituted these proceedings on or around

14.06.2014 under section 66(1)(b) of the Primary Courts

Procedure Act in the Magistrates Court, on the basis that he

was forcibly dispossessed from the land in dispute by the police

on 03.06.2014 on the ground that the petitioner purchased the

land.

Website Copy Website Copy

6

It is undisputed that Vallipuram, the father of the respondent,

was, at one time, the owner of the land. The respondent claims

the land on inheritance.

The position of the petitioner seems to be that Vallipuram

transferred the land on a deed of conditional transfer to

Yogeshwary, the mother of Ganeshan; upon failure to fulfil the

conditions of the said deed, Yogeswary became the absolute

owner of the land; upon the death of Yogeswary, Ganeshan

prepared a deed of declaration and transferred the land to the

petitioner by way of a deed executed in 2012.

According to this deed, both Ganeshan and the petitioner are

living in Colombo although the land is in Jaffna.

The learned High Court Judge has stated in his Judgment that

there is no proof that possession was handed over to Yogeswary

with the execution of the conditional deed of transfer. Ganeshan

was only 9 years old at the time.

According to page 6 of the Judgment of the High Court, the

Grama Seva officer of the area, by E21, has confirmed that the

subject land was in the possession of the respondent and his

parents up to 1987 and, due to the civil war, nobody was in

possession of this land from 1987-2010.

Both parties have tendered copious documents, including

affidavits from various people, to prove possession.

The respondents position is that he employed Baskaran as a

watcher to look after this land. He has tendered bank slips to

prove deposit of money as salary in the name of Baskaran.

Website Copy Website Copy

7

However, none of these bank slips are relevant to the year 2014.

The alleged dispossession has taken place on 03.06.2014.

According to the petitioner, when he was in possession through

Baskaran, the respondent forcibly entered the land on

03.06.2014. But, neither the respondent nor Baskaran made a

single complaint to the police. At the argument, the learned

counsel admitted that the police removed the respondent from

the land on 03.06.2014, but they did so on the request of the

petitioner to prevent a breach of the peace. When the Court

inquired how the police acted so swiftly without a police

complaint, the learned counsel candidly stated that the

respondent was a former Assistant Superintendent of Police.

This shows the police have not independently investigated this

land dispute and have referred the matter to the Magistrates

Court under section 66 of the Primary Courts Procedure Act for

the Court to take a decision.

The private security guards were employed after the incident on

03.06.2014.

By way of an interim order the learned Magistrate restored the

respondent to possession at the beginning of the case, and the

leave to appeal application filed against that interim order was

refused by the High Court.

The respondent is now in possession of the land.

At the argument it was revealed that the respondent has filed a

civil case in the District Court against the petitioner to vindicate

his rights regarding this land.

Website Copy Website Copy

8

I do not think that the Judgment of the High Court is ex facie

erroneous, as the learned counsel for the petitioner submits.

According to the facts and circumstances of this case, the

Judgment of the High Court is correct.

I dismiss the revision application with costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Website Copy Website Copy